A Comprehensive Overview of Large Language Models
Humza Naveeda, Asad Ullah Khanb,∗, Shi Qiuc,∗, Muhammad Saqibd,e,∗, Saeed Anwarf,g, Muhammad Usmanf,g, Naveed Akhtarh,j,
Nick Barnesi, Ajmal Mianj
aThe University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
bUniversity of Engineering and Technology (UET), Lahore, Pakistan
cThe Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK), HKSAR, China
dUniversity of Technology Sydney (UTS), Sydney, Australia
eCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Sydney, Australia
fKing Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM), Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
gSDAIA-KFUPM Joint Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (JRCAI), Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
hThe University of Melbourne (UoM), Melbourne, Australia
iAustralian National University (ANU), Canberra, Australia
jThe University of Western Australia (UWA), Perth, Australia
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable capabilities in natural language processing tasks and
beyond. This success of LLMs has led to a large influx of research contributions in this direction. These works encompass diverse
topics such as architectural innovations, better training strategies, context length improvements, fine-tuning, multi-modal LLMs,
robotics, datasets, benchmarking, efficiency, and more. With the rapid development of techniques and regular breakthroughs in
LLM research, it has become considerably challenging to perceive the bigger picture of the advances in this direction. Considering
the rapidly emerging plethora of literature on LLMs, it is imperative that the research community is able to benefit from a concise
yet comprehensive overview of the recent developments in this field. This article provides an overview of the literature on a broad
range of LLM-related concepts. Our self-contained comprehensive overview of LLMs discusses relevant background concepts
along with covering the advanced topics at the frontier of research in LLMs. This review article is intended to provide not only a
systematic survey but also a quick, comprehensive reference for the researchers and practitioners to draw insights from extensive,
informative summaries of the existing works to advance the LLM research.
Keywords:
Large Language Models, LLMs, chatGPT, Augmented LLMs, Multimodal LLMs, LLM training, LLM Benchmarking
1. Introduction
Language plays a fundamental role in facilitating commu-
nication and self-expression for humans and their interaction
with machines. The need for generalized models stems from
the growing demand for machines to handle complex language
tasks, including translation, summarization, information re-
trieval, conversational interactions, etc. Recently, significant
breakthroughs have been witnessed in language models, pri-
marily attributed to transformers [1], increased computational
capabilities, and the availability of large-scale training data.
These developments have brought about a revolutionary trans-
formation by enabling the creation of LLMs that can approxi-
mate human-level performance on various tasks [2, 3]. Large
∗Equal contribution
Email addresses: humza_naveed@yahoo.com (Humza Naveed),
aukhanee@gmail.com (Asad Ullah Khan), shiqiu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk (Shi
Qiu), muhammad.saqib@data61.csiro.au (Muhammad Saqib),
saeed.anwar@kfupm.edu.sa (Saeed Anwar),
muhammad.usman@kfupm.edu.sa (Muhammad Usman),
naveed.akhtar1@unimelb.edu.au (Naveed Akhtar),
nick.barnes@anu.edu.au (Nick Barnes), ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au
(Ajmal Mian)
Figure 1: The trend of papers released over the years containing keywords
"Large Language Model", "Large Language Model + Fine-Tuning", and "Large
Language Model + Alignment".
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
October 18, 2024
arXiv:2307.06435v10  [cs.CL]  17 Oct 2024

2019
T5 (Oct)
GPT-3 (May)
WebGPT (Dec)
OPT-IML
TK-Instruct (May)
mT0 (Dec)
Wizard-LM
Vicuna
Alpaca (Mar)
HuaTuo (Apr)
Koala (May)
Wizard-Coder (Jun)
Goat
PanGu-α (Apr)
CPM-2 (Jun)
GPT-NeoX-20B (Apr)
CodeGen (Mar) 
Galactica (Nov)
GLM (Oct)
OPT
UL2 (May)
LLaMA (Feb)
LLaMA 2 (Jul)
MPT (Jun)
CodeT5+
Code Llama (Aug)
StarCoder
Xuan Yuan 2.0 (May)
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
mT5 (Oct)
HyperCLOVA (Sep)
ERNIE 3.0
Codex (Jul)
Jurassic-1 (Aug)
Yuan 1.0 (Oct)
Gopher (Dec)
ERNIE 3.0 Titan
GLaM
LaMDA
T0 (Oct)
ChatGPT (Nov)
Sparrow (Sep)
FLAN-U-PaLM (Oct)
Bard (Oct)
MT-NLG (Jan)
AlphaCode (Feb)
Chinchilla (Mar)
PaLM (Apr)
U-PALM (Oct)
BLOOM (Nov)
AlexaTM (Aug)
PaLM2 (May)
GPT-4
PanGu-Σ (Mar)
BloombergGPT
Claude
Gemini (Dec)
DeepSeek (Jan)
LLaMA 3 
Grok-1 (Mar)
Snowflake Arctic (Apr)
DeepSeek-V2 (May)
Mixtral 8x22B
Nemotron (Feb)
GPT-4o (May)
OpenAI o1 (Sep)
Gemini-1.5 (Feb)
Grok-1.5 (Apr)
Figure 2: Chronological display of LLM releases: blue cards represent ‘pre-trained’ models, while orange cards correspond to ‘instruction-tuned’ models. Models
on the upper half signify open-source availability, whereas those on the bottom are closed-source. The chart illustrates the increasing trend towards instruction-tuned
and open-source models, highlighting the evolving landscape and trends in natural language processing research.
Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as cutting-edge arti-
ficial intelligence systems that can process and generate text
with coherent communication [4] and generalize to multiple
tasks [5, 6].
The historical progress in natural language processing (NLP)
evolved from statistical to neural language modeling and then
from pre-trained language models (PLMs) to LLMs.
While
conventional language modeling (LM) trains task-specific mod-
els in supervised settings, PLMs are trained in a self-supervised
setting on a large corpus of text [7, 8, 9] with the aim of learning
a generic representation that is shareable among various NLP
tasks. After fine-tuning for downstream tasks, PLMs surpass
the performance gains of traditional language modeling (LM).
The larger PLMs bring more performance gains, which has led
to the transitioning of PLMs to LLMs by significantly increas-
ing model parameters (tens to hundreds of billions) [10] and
training dataset (many GBs and TBs) [10, 11]. Following this
development, numerous LLMs have been proposed in the lit-
erature [10, 11, 12, 6, 13, 14, 15]. An increasing trend in the
number of released LLMs and names of a few significant LLMs
proposed over the years are shown in Fig 1 and Fig 2, respec-
tively.
The early work on LLMs, such as T5 [10] and mT5 [11] em-
ployed transfer learning until GPT-3 [6] showed LLMs are
zero-shot transferable to downstream tasks without fine-tuning.
LLMs accurately respond to task queries when prompted with
task descriptions and examples. However, pre-trained LLMs
fail to follow user intent and perform worse in zero-shot set-
tings than in few-shot.
Fine-tuning them with task instruc-
tions data [16, 17, 18, 19] and aligning with human prefer-
ences [20, 21] enhances generalization to unseen tasks, im-
proving zero-shot performance significantly and reducing mis-
aligned behavior.
In addition to better generalization and domain adaptation,
LLMs appear to have emergent abilities, such as reasoning,
planning, decision-making, in-context learning, answering in
zero-shot settings, etc.
These abilities are known to be ac-
quired by them due to their gigantic scale even when the pre-
trained LLMs are not trained specifically to possess these at-
tributes [22, 23, 24]. Such abilities have led LLMs to be widely
adopted in diverse settings, including multi-modal, robotics,
tool manipulation, question answering, autonomous agents, etc.
Various improvements have also been suggested in these areas
either by task-specific training [25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31] or
better prompting [32].
The LLMs abilities to solve diverse tasks with human-level
performance come at the cost of slow training and inference,
extensive hardware requirements, and higher running costs.
Such requirements have limited their adoption and opened up
opportunities to devise better architectures [15, 33, 34, 35]
and training strategies [36, 37, 21, 38, 39, 40, 41].
Param-
eter efficient tuning [38, 41, 40], pruning [42, 43], quantiza-
tion [44, 45], knowledge distillation, and context length inter-
polation [46, 47, 48, 49] among others are some of the methods
widely studied for efficient LLM utilization.
Due to the success of LLMs on a wide variety of tasks, the
research literature has recently experienced a large influx of
LLM-related contributions.
Researchers have organized the
LLMs literature in surveys [50, 51, 52, 53], and topic-specific
surveys in [54, 55, 56, 57, 58]. In contrast to these surveys, our
contribution focuses on providing a comprehensive yet concise
overview of the general direction of LLM research. This arti-
cle summarizes architectural and training details of pre-trained
LLMs and delves deeper into the details of concepts like fine-
tuning, multi-modal LLMs, augmented LLMs, datasets, eval-
uation, applications, challenges, and others to provide a self-
contained comprehensive overview. Our key contributions are
summarized as follows.
• We present a survey on the developments in LLM research,
providing a concise, comprehensive overview of the direc-
tion.
• We present extensive summaries of pre-trained models that
include fine-grained details of architecture and training de-
tails.
• We summarize major findings of the popular contributions
and provide a detailed discussion on the key design and
development aspects of LLMs to help practitioners effec-
tively leverage this technology.
• In this self-contained article, we cover a range of con-
cepts to present the general direction of LLMs compre-
hensively, including background, pre-training, fine-tuning,
2

Figure 3: A broader overview of LLMs, dividing LLMs into seven branches: 1. Pre-Training 2. Fine-Tuning 3. Efficient 4. Inference 5. Evaluation 6. Applications
7. Challenges
multi-modal LLMs, augmented LLMs, LLMs-powered
agents, datasets, evaluation, etc.
We loosely follow the existing terminology to ensure a stan-
dardized outlook of this research direction. For instance, fol-
lowing [50], our survey discusses pre-trained LLMs with 10B
parameters or more. We refer the readers interested in smaller
pre-trained models to [51, 52, 53].
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses
the background of LLMs. Section 3 focuses on LLMs overview,
architectures, training pipelines and strategies, fine-tuning, and
utilization in different domains. Section 4 highlights the config-
uration and parameters that play a crucial role in the function-
ing of these models. Summary and discussions are presented
in section 3.8. The LLM training and evaluation, datasets, and
benchmarks are discussed in section 5, followed by challenges
and future directions, and conclusion in sections 7 and 8, re-
spectively.
3

2. Background
We provide the relevant background to understand the fun-
damentals related to LLMs in this section. We briefly discuss
necessary components in LLMs and refer the readers interested
in details to the original works.
2.1. Tokenization
Tokenization [59] is an essential pre-processing step in
LLM training that parses the text into non-decomposing units
called tokens. Tokens can be characters, subwords [60], sym-
bols [61], or words, depending on the tokenization process.
Some of the commonly used tokenization schemes in LLMs
include wordpiece [62], byte pair encoding (BPE) [61], and un-
igramLM [60]. Readers are encouraged to refer to [63] for a
detailed survey.
2.2. Encoding Positions
The transformer processes input sequences in parallel and
independently of each other.
Moreover, the attention mod-
ule in the transformer does not capture positional information.
As a result, positional encodings were introduced in trans-
former [64], where a positional embedding vector is added to
the token embedding. Variants of positional embedding include
absolute, relative, or learned positional encodings. Within rel-
ative encoding, Alibi and RoPE are two widely used positional
embeddings in LLMs.
Alibi [65]: It subtracts a scalar bias from the attention score
that increases with the distance between token positions. This
favors using recent tokens for attention.
RoPE [66]: It rotates query and key representations at an an-
gle proportional to the token absolute position in the input
sequence, resulting in a relative positional encoding scheme
which decays with the distance between the tokens.
2.3. Attention in LLMs
Attention assigns weights to input tokens based on impor-
tance so that the model gives more emphasis to relevant tokens.
Attention in transformers [64] calculates query, key, and value
mappings for input sequences, where the attention score is
obtained by multiplying the query and key, and later used to
weight values. We discuss different attention strategies used in
LLMs below.
Self-Attention [64]: Calculates attention using queries, keys,
and values from the same block (encoder or decoder).
Cross Attention: It is used in encoder-decoder architectures,
where encoder outputs are the queries, and key-value pairs
come from the decoder.
Sparse Attention [67]: Self-attention has O(n2) time complex-
ity which becomes infeasible for large sequences. To speed
up the computation, sparse attention [67] iteratively calculates
attention in sliding windows for speed gains.
Flash Attention [68]: Memory access is the major bottleneck
in calculating attention using GPUs.
To speed up, flash
attention employs input tiling to minimize the memory reads
and writes between the GPU high bandwidth memory (HBM)
and the on-chip SRAM.
2.4. Activation Functions
The activation functions serve a crucial role in the curve-
fitting abilities of neural networks [69]. We discuss activation
functions used in LLMs in this section.
ReLU [70]: The Rectified linear unit (ReLU) is defined as:
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(1)
GeLU [71]: The Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GeLU) is the
combination of ReLU, dropout [72] and zoneout [73].
GLU variants [74]: The Gated Linear Unit [75] is a neural
network layer that is an element-wise product (⊗) of a linear
transformation and a sigmoid transformed (σ) linear projection
of the input given as:
GLU(x, W, V, b, c) = (xW + b) ⊗σ(xV + c),
(2)
where X is the input of layer and l, W, b, V and c are learned
parameters. Other GLU variants [74] used in LLMs are:
ReGLU(x, W, V, b, c) = max(0, xW + b)⊗,
GEGLU(x, W, V, b, c) = GELU(xW + b) ⊗(xV + c),
S wiGLU(x, W, V, b, c, β) = S wishβ(xW + b) ⊗(xV + c).
2.5. Layer Normalization
Layer normalization leads to faster convergence and is an in-
tegrated component of transformers [64]. In addition to Layer-
Norm [76] and RMSNorm [77], LLMs use pre-layer normal-
ization [78], applying it before multi-head attention (MHA).
Pre-norm is shown to provide training stability in LLMs. An-
other normalization variant, DeepNorm [79] fixes the issue with
larger gradients in pre-norm.
2.6. Distributed LLM Training
This section describes distributed LLM training approaches
briefly. More details are available in [13, 37, 80, 81].
Data Parallelism: Data parallelism replicates the model on
multiple devices where data in a batch gets divided across de-
vices. At the end of each training iteration weights are synchro-
nized across all devices.
Tensor Parallelism: Tensor parallelism shards a tensor compu-
tation across devices. It is also known as horizontal parallelism
or intra-layer model parallelism.
Pipeline Parallelism: Pipeline parallelism shards model layers
across different devices. This is also known as vertical paral-
lelism.
Model Parallelism: A combination of tensor and pipeline par-
allelism is known as model parallelism.
3D Parallelism: A combination of data, tensor, and model par-
allelism is known as 3D parallelism.
Optimizer Parallelism: Optimizer parallelism also known as
zero redundancy optimizer [37] implements optimizer state
partitioning, gradient partitioning, and parameter partitioning
across devices to reduce memory consumption while keeping
the communication costs as low as possible.
4

2.7. Libraries
Some commonly used libraries for LLMs training are:
Transformers [82]: The library provides access to various pre-
trained transformer models with APIs to train, fine-tune, infer,
and develop custom models.
DeepSpeed [36]: A library for scalable distributed training and
inference of deep learning models.
Megatron-LM [80]: It provides GPU-optimized techniques for
large-scale training of LLMs.
JAX [83]: A Python library for high-performance numerical
computing and scaleable machine learning. It can differenti-
ate native Python and NumPy functions and execute them on
GPUs.
Colossal-AI [84]: A collection of components to write dis-
tributed deep learning models.
BMTrain [81]: A library to write efficient stand-alone LLMs
training code.
FastMoE [85]:
Provides API to build mixture-of-experts
(MoE) model in PyTorch.
MindSpore [86]: A deep learning training and inference frame-
work extendable to mobile, edge, and cloud computing.
PyTorch [87]: A framework developed by Facebook AI Re-
search lab (FAIR) to build deep learning models. The main
features of PyTorch include a dynamic computation graph and
a pythonic coding style.
Tensorflow [88]:
A deep learning framework written by
Google. The key features of TensorFlow are graph-based com-
putation, eager execution, scalability, etc.
MXNet [89]: Apache MXNet is a deep learning framework
with support to write programs in multiple languages, includ-
ing, Python, C++, Scala, R, etc. It also provides support for
dynamic and static computation graphs.
2.8. Data PreProcessing
This section briefly summarizes data preprocessing tech-
niques used in LLMs training.
Quality Filtering: For better results, training data quality is
essential. Some approaches to filtering data are: 1) classifier-
based and 2) heuristics-based.
Classifier-based approaches
train a classifier on high-quality data and predict the quality of
text for filtering, whereas heuristics-based employ some rules
for filtering like language, metrics, statistics, and keywords.
Data Deduplication: Duplicated data can affect model per-
formance and increase data memorization; therefore, to train
LLMs, data deduplication is one of the preprocessing steps.
This can be performed at multiple levels, like sentences,
documents, and datasets.
Privacy Reduction: Most of the training data for LLMs is
collected through web sources.
This data contains private
information; therefore, many LLMs employ heuristics-based
methods to filter information such as names, addresses, and
phone numbers to avoid learning personal information.
2.9. Architectures
Here we discuss the variants of the transformer architectures
used in LLMs. The difference arises due to the application of
Figure 4: An example of attention patterns in language models, image is taken
from [93].
Figure 5: An example of language model training objectives, image from [93].
the attention and the connection of transformer blocks. An il-
lustration of attention patterns of these architectures is shown
in Figure 4.
Encoder Decoder: This architecture processes inputs through
the encoder and passes the intermediate representation to the
decoder to generate the output.
Here, the encoder sees the
complete sequence utilizing self-attention whereas the decoder
processes the sequence one after the other with implementing
cross-attention.
Causal Decoder: A type of architecture that does not have an
encoder and processes and generates output using a decoder,
where the predicted token depends only on the previous time
steps.
Prefix Decoder: It is also known as a non-causal decoder,
where the attention calculation is not strictly dependent on the
past information and the attention is bidirectional. An example
of a non-causal attention mask is shown in Figure 4.
Mixture-of-Experts: It is a variant of transformer architecture
with parallel independent experts and a router to route tokens
to experts. These experts are feed-forward layers after the at-
tention block [90]. Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) is an efficient
sparse architecture that offers comparable performance to dense
models and allows increasing the model size without increas-
ing the computational cost by activating only a few experts at a
time [91, 92].
2.10. Pre-Training Objectives
This section describes LLMs pre-training objectives.
For
more details see the paper [93].
Full Language Modeling: An autoregressive language model-
ing objective where the model is asked to predict future tokens
given the previous tokens, an example is shown in Figure 5.
Prefix Language Modeling: A non-causal training objective,
where a prefix is chosen randomly and only remaining target
tokens are used to calculate the loss. An example is shown in
Figure 5.
5

Figure 6: A basic flow diagram depicting various stages of LLMs from pre-training to prompting/utilization. Prompting LLMs to generate responses is possible at
different training stages like pre-training, instruction-tuning, or alignment tuning. “RL” stands for reinforcement learning, “RM” represents reward-modeling, and
“RLHF” represents reinforcement learning with human feedback.
Masked Language Modeling: In this training objective, tokens
or spans (a sequence of tokens) are masked randomly and the
model is asked to predict masked tokens given the past and
future context. An example is shown in Figure 5.
Unified Language Modeling: Unified language modeling [94]
is a combination of causal, non-causal, and masked language
training objectives. Here in masked language modeling, the
attention is not bidirectional but unidirectional, attending either
left-to-right or right-to-left context.
2.11. LLMs Scaling Laws
Scaling laws study the optimal combination of model param-
eters, dataset size, and computational resources that predict the
improvement in the model performance. It has been shown
that the loss scales according to the power-law with model size,
dataset size, and compute resources [95]. This study suggests
larger models are more important than big data for better perfor-
mance. Another variant of scaling law [96] suggests the model
size and the number of training tokens should be scaled equally.
2.12. LLMs Adaptation Stages
This section discusses the fundamentals of LLMs adaptation
stages, from pre-training to fine-tuning for downstream tasks
and utilization. An example of different training stages and in-
ference in LLMs is shown in Figure 6. In this paper, we refer
to alignment-tuning as aligning with human preferences, while
occasionally the literature uses the term alignment for different
purposes.
2.12.1. Pre-Training
In the very first stage, the model is trained in a self-
supervised manner on a large corpus to predict the next to-
kens given the input. The design choices of LLMs vary from
encoder-decoder to decoder-only architectures with different
building blocks and loss functions in sections 2.5, 2.4, 2.10.
2.12.2. Fine-Tuning
There are different styles to fine-tune an LLM. This section
briefly discusses fine-tuning approaches.
Transfer Learning: The pre-trained LLMs perform well for
various tasks [6, 15]. However, to improve the performance for
6

a downstream task, pre-trained models are fine-tuned with the
task-specific data [10, 11], known as transfer learning.
Instruction-tuning: To enable a model to respond to user
queries effectively, the pre-trained model is fine-tuned on in-
struction formatted data i.e., instruction and an input-output
pair. Instructions generally comprise multi-task data in plain
natural language, guiding the model to respond according to the
prompt and the input. This type of fine-tuning improves zero-
shot generalization and downstream task performance. Details
on formatting instruction data and its various styles are avail-
able in [16, 50, 97].
Alignment-tuning: LLMs are prone to generating false, biased,
and harmful text. To make them helpful, honest, and harmless,
models are aligned using human feedback. Alignment involves
asking LLMs to generate unexpected responses and then updat-
ing their parameters to avoid such responses [20, 21, 98].
It ensures LLMs operate according to human intentions and
values. A model is defined to be an “aligned” model if the
model fulfills three criteria of helpful, honest, and harmless or
“HHH” [99].
Researchers employ reinforcement learning with human feed-
back (RLHF) [100] for model alignment. In RLHF, a fine-tuned
model on demonstrations is further trained with reward model-
ing (RM) and reinforcement learning (RL), shown in Figure 6.
Below we briefly discuss RM and RL pipelines in RLHF.
Reward modeling: trains a model to rank generated responses
according to human preferences using a classification objec-
tive. To train the classifier humans annotate LLMs generated
responses based on the HHH criteria.
Reinforcement learning: in combination with the reward model
is used for alignment in the next stage. The previously trained
reward model ranks LLM-generated responses into preferred
vs. non-preferred, which is used to align the model with proxi-
mal policy optimization (PPO). This process repeats iteratively
until convergence.
2.12.3. Prompting/Utilization
Prompting is a method to query trained LLMs for generating
responses, as illustrated in Figure 6. LLMs can be prompted in
various prompt setups, where they can be adapted to the instruc-
tions without fine-tuning and in other cases with fine-tuning on
data containing different prompt styles [16, 101, 102]. A good
guide on prompt engineering is available at [32]. Below, we
will discuss various widely used prompt setups.
Zero-Shot Prompting: LLMs are zero-shot learners and ca-
pable of answering queries never seen before. This style of
prompting requires LLMs to answer user questions without see-
ing any examples in the prompt.
In-context Learning: Also known as few-shot learning, here,
multiple input-output demonstration pairs are shown to the
model to generate the desired response. This adaptation style
is also called few-shot learning. A discussion on formatting in-
context learning (ICL) templates is available in [54, 50, 18, 16].
Reasoning in LLMs: LLMs are zero-shot reasoners and can
be provoked to generate answers to logical problems, task
planning, critical thinking, etc. with reasoning.
Generating
reasons is possible only by using different prompting styles,
whereas to improve LLMs further on reasoning tasks many
methods [16, 97] train them on reasoning datasets. We discuss
various prompting techniques for reasoning below.
Chain-of-Thought (CoT): A special case of prompting where
demonstrations contain reasoning information aggregated with
inputs and outputs so that the model generates outcomes with
step-by-step reasoning. More details on CoT prompts are avail-
able in [55, 103, 101].
Self-Consistency:
Improves CoT performance by generat-
ing multiple responses and selecting the most frequent an-
swer [104].
Tree-of-Thought (ToT): Explores multiple reasoning paths
with possibilities to look ahead and backtrack for problem-
solving [105].
Single-Turn Instructions: In this prompting setup, LLMs are
queried only once with all the relevant information in the
prompt. LLMs generate responses by understanding the con-
text either in a zero-shot or few-shot setting.
Multi-Turn Instructions: Solving a complex task requires mul-
tiple interactions with LLMs, where feedback and responses
from the other tools are given as input to the LLM for the next
rounds. This style of using LLMs in the loop is common in
autonomous agents.
3. Large Language Models
This section reviews LLMs, briefly describing their architec-
tures, training objectives, pipelines, datasets, and fine-tuning
details.
3.1. Pre-Trained LLMs
Here, we provide summaries of various well-known pre-
trained LLMs with significant discoveries, changing the course
of research and development in NLP. These LLMs have consid-
erably improved the performance in NLU and NLG domains,
and are widely fine-tuned for downstream tasks. Moreover, We
also identify key findings and insights of pre-trained LLMs in
Table 1 and 2 that improve their performance.
3.1.1. General Purpose
T5 [10]: An encoder-decoder model employing a unified text-
to-text training for all NLP problems is shown in Figure 7. T5
places layer normalization outside the residual path in a conven-
tional transformer model [64]. It uses masked language mod-
eling as a pre-training objective where spans (consecutive to-
kens) are replaced with a single mask instead of separate masks
for each token. This type of masking speeds up the training as
it produces shorter sequences. After pre-training, the model is
fine-tuned using adapter layers [106] for downstream tasks.
GPT-3 [6]: The GPT-3 architecture is the same as the GPT-
2 [5] but with dense and sparse attention in transformer layers
similar to the Sparse Transformer [67]. It shows that large mod-
els can train on larger batch sizes with a lower learning rate to
decide the batch size during training, GPT-3 uses the gradient
noise scale as in [107]. Overall, GPT-3 increases model param-
eters to 175B showing that the performance of large language
7

Figure 7: Unified text-to-text training example, source image from [10].
Figure 8: The image is the article of [108], showing an example of PanGu-α
architecture.
models improves with the scale and is competitive with the fine-
tuned models.
mT5 [11]: A multilingual T5 model [10] trained on the mC4
dataset with 101 languages. The dataset is extracted from the
public common crawl scrape. The model uses a larger vocab-
ulary size of 250,000 to cover multiple languages. To avoid
over-fitting or under-fitting for a language, mT5 employs a data
sampling procedure to select samples from all languages. The
paper suggests using a small amount of pre-training datasets,
including all languages when fine-tuning for a task using En-
glish language data. This allows the model to generate correct
non-English outputs.
PanGu-α [108]: An autoregressive model that has a query
layer at the end of standard transformer layers, example shown
in Figure 8, to predict the next token. Its structure is similar to
the transformer layer but with an additional embedding for the
next position in the attention mechanism, given in Eq. 3.
a = pnWq
hWk
hTHT
L
(3)
CPM-2 [12]: Cost-efficient Pre-trained language Models
(CPM-2) pre-trains bilingual (English and Chinese) 11B and
198B mixture-of-experts (MoE) models on the WuDaoCor-
pus [109] dataset. The tokenization process removes “_” white
space tokens in the sentencepiece tokenizer. The models are
trained with knowledge inheritance, starting with only the Chi-
nese language in the first stage and then adding English and
Chinese data. This trained model gets duplicated multiple times
to initialize the 198B MoE model. Moreover, to use the model
for downstream tasks, CPM-2 experimented with both com-
plete fine-tuning and prompt fine-tuning as in [40] where only
prompt-related parameters are updated by inserting prompts at
various positions, front, middle, and back. CPM-2 also pro-
poses the INFMOE, a memory-efficient framework with a strat-
egy to dynamically offload parameters to the CPU for inference
at a 100B scale. It overlaps data movement with inference com-
putation for lower inference time.
ERNIE 3.0 [110]: ERNIE 3.0 takes inspiration from multi-
task learning to build a modular architecture using Transformer-
XL [111] as the backbone. The universal representation mod-
ule is shared by all the tasks, which serve as the basic block
for task-specific representation modules, which are all trained
jointly for natural language understanding, natural language
generation, and knowledge extraction. This LLM is primar-
ily focused on the Chinese language. It claims to train on the
largest Chinese text corpora for LLM training, and achieved
state-of-the-art in 54 Chinese NLP tasks.
Jurassic-1 [112]: A pair of auto-regressive language mod-
els, including a 7B-parameter J1-Large model and a 178B-
parameter J1-Jumbo model.
The training vocabulary of
Jurassic-1 comprise word pieces, complete words, and multi-
word expressions without any word boundaries, where possible
out-of-vocabulary instances are interpreted as Unicode bytes.
Compared to the GPT-3 counterparts, the Jurassic-1 models
apply a more balanced depth-to-width self-attention architec-
ture [113] and an improved tokenizer for a faster prediction
based on broader resources, achieving a comparable perfor-
mance in zero-shot learning tasks and a superior performance in
few-shot learning tasks given the ability to feed more examples
as a prompt.
HyperCLOVA [114]: A Korean language model with GPT-3
architecture.
Yuan 1.0 [115]: Trained on a Chinese corpus with 5TB of
high-quality text collected from the Internet. A Massive Data
Filtering System (MDFS) built on Spark is developed to pro-
cess the raw data via coarse and fine filtering techniques. To
speed up the training of Yuan 1.0 to save energy expenses and
carbon emissions, various factors that improve the performance
of distributed training are incorporated in architecture and train-
ing: like increasing the hidden state size improves pipeline and
tensor parallelism performance, larger micro batches improve
pipeline parallelism performance, and larger global batch size
improve data parallelism performance. In practice, the Yuan 1.0
model performs well on text classification, Winograd Schema,
natural language inference, and reading comprehension tasks.
Gopher [116]: The Gopher family of models ranges from
44M to 280B parameters in size to study the effect of scale
on the LLMs performance. The 280B model beats GPT-3 [6],
Jurrasic-1 [112], MT-NLG [117], and others on 81% of the
evaluated tasks.
ERNIE 3.0 TITAN [35]: ERNIE 3.0 Titan extends ERNIE 3.0
by training a larger model with 26x the number of parameters
of the latter. This bigger model outperformed other state-of-the-
art models in 68 NLP tasks. LLMs produce text with incorrect
facts. In order to have control of the generated text with fac-
tual consistency, ERNIE 3.0 Titan adds another task, Credible
and Controllable Generations, to its multi-task learning setup.
8

It introduces additional self-supervised adversarial and control-
lable language modeling losses to the pre-training step, which
enables ERNIE 3.0 Titan to beat other LLMs in their manually
selected Factual QA task set evaluations.
GPT-NeoX-20B [118]: An auto-regressive model that largely
follows GPT-3 with a few deviations in architecture design,
trained on the Pile dataset without any data deduplication. GPT-
NeoX has parallel attention and feed-forward layers in a trans-
former block, given in Eq. 4, that increases throughput by 15%.
It uses rotary positional embedding [66], applying it to only
25% of embedding vector dimension as in [119]. This reduces
the computation without performance degradation. As opposed
to GPT-3, which uses dense and sparse layers, GPT-NeoX-20B
uses only dense layers. The hyperparameter tuning at this scale
is difficult; therefore, the model chooses hyperparameters from
the method [6] and interpolates values between 13B and 175B
models for the 20B model. The model training is distributed
among GPUs using both tensor and pipeline parallelism.
x + Attn(LN1(x)) + FF(LN2(x))
(4)
OPT [14]: It is a clone of GPT-3, developed to open-source
a model that replicates GPT-3 performance. Training of OPT
employs dynamic loss scaling [120] and restarts from an earlier
checkpoint with a lower learning rate whenever loss divergence
is observed. Overall, the performance of OPT-175B models is
comparable to the GPT3-175B model.
BLOOM [13]: A causal decoder model trained on the ROOTS
corpus to open-source an LLM. The architecture of BLOOM is
shown in Figure 9, with differences like ALiBi positional em-
bedding, an additional normalization layer after the embedding
layer as suggested by the bitsandbytes1 library. These changes
stabilize training with improved downstream performance.
GLaM [91]: Generalist Language Model (GLaM) represents a
family of language models using a sparsely activated decoder-
only mixture-of-experts (MoE) structure [121, 90].
To gain
more model capacity while reducing computation, the experts
are sparsely activated where only the best two experts are used
to process each input token. The largest GLaM model, GLaM
(64B/64E), is about 7× larger than GPT-3 [6], while only part of
the parameters are activated per input token. The largest GLaM
(64B/64E) model achieves better overall results as compared
to GPT-3 while consuming only one-third of GPT-3’s training
energy.
MT-NLG [117]: A 530B causal decoder based on the GPT-
2 architecture that has roughly 3× GPT-3 model parameters.
MT-NLG is trained on filtered high-quality data collected from
various public datasets and blends various types of datasets in a
single batch, which beats GPT-3 on several evaluations.
Chinchilla [96]: A causal decoder trained on the same dataset
as the Gopher [116] but with a little different data sampling
distribution (sampled from MassiveText). The model architec-
ture is similar to the one used for Gopher, with the exception of
AdamW optimizer instead of Adam. Chinchilla identifies the
1https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes
Figure 9: The BLOOM architecture example sourced from [13].
relationship that model size should be doubled for every dou-
bling of training tokens. Over 400 language models ranging
from 70 million to over 16 billion parameters on 5 to 500 bil-
lion tokens are trained to get the estimates for compute-optimal
training under a given budget. The authors train a 70B model
with the same compute budget as Gopher (280B) but with 4
times more data. It outperforms Gopher [116], GPT-3 [6], and
others on various downstream tasks, after fine-tuning.
AlexaTM [122]: An encoder-decoder model, where encoder
weights and decoder embeddings are initialized with a pre-
trained encoder to speed up training. The encoder stays frozen
for the initial 100k steps and is later unfrozen for end-to-end
training. The model is trained on a combination of denoising
and causal language modeling (CLM) objectives, concatenat-
ing a [CLM] token at the beginning for mode switching. Dur-
ing training, the CLM task is applied for 20% of the time, which
improves the in-context learning performance.
PaLM [15]: A causal decoder with parallel attention and
feed-forward layers similar to Eq. 4, speeding up training by
a factor of 15. Additional changes to the conventional trans-
former model include SwiGLU activation, RoPE embeddings,
multi-query attention that saves computation cost during decod-
ing, and shared input-output embeddings. During training, loss
spiking was observed, and to fix it, model training was restarted
from a 100-step earlier checkpoint by skipping 200-500 batches
around the spike. Moreover, the model was found to memo-
rize around 2.4% of the training data at the 540B model scale,
whereas this number was lower for smaller models.
PaLM-2 [123]: A smaller multi-lingual variant of PaLM,
trained for larger iterations on a better quality dataset. PaLM-
2 shows significant improvements over PaLM, while reducing
training and inference costs due to its smaller size. To lessen
toxicity and memorization, it appends special tokens with a
fraction of pre-training data, which shows a reduction in gener-
ating harmful responses.
U-PaLM [124]: This method trains PaLM for 0.1% addi-
tional compute with the UL2 (also named as UL2Restore) ob-
jective [125], using the same dataset it outperforms the baseline
significantly on various NLP tasks, including zero-shot, few-
shot, commonsense reasoning, CoT, etc. Training with UL2R
involves converting a causal decoder PaLM to a non-causal de-
coder PaLM and employing 50% sequential denoising, 25%
regular denoising, and 25% extreme denoising loss functions.
9

UL2 [125]: An encoder-decoder architecture trained using a
mixture of denoisers (MoD) objective. Denoisers include 1)
R-Denoiser: a regular span masking, 2) S-Denoiser: which cor-
rupts consecutive tokens of a large sequence and 3) X-Denoiser:
which corrupts a large number of tokens randomly. During pre-
training, UL2 includes a denoiser token from R, S, X to rep-
resent a denoising setup. It helps improve fine-tuning perfor-
mance for downstream tasks that bind the task to one of the up-
stream training modes. This MoD style of training outperforms
the T5 model on many benchmarks.
GLM-130B [33]: GLM-130B is a bilingual (English and Chi-
nese) model trained using an auto-regressive mask infilling pre-
training objective similar to the GLM [126]. This training style
makes the model bidirectional as compared to GPT-3, which is
unidirectional. As opposed to GLM, the training of GLM-130B
includes a small amount of multi-task instruction pre-training
data (5% of the total data) along with self-supervised mask in-
filling. To stabilize the training, it applies embedding layer gra-
dient shrink.
LLaMA [127, 21]: A set of decoder-only language models
varying from 7B to 70B parameters. LLaMA models series is
the most famous among the community for parameter efficiency
and instruction tuning.
LLaMA-1 [127]: Implements efficient causal attention [128]
by not storing and computing masked attention weights and
key/query scores. Another optimization is reducing the number
of activations recomputed in the backward pass, as in [129].
LLaMA-2 [21]: This work is more focused on fine-tuning a
safer and better LLaMA-2-Chat model for dialogue generation.
The pre-trained model has 40% more training data with a larger
context length and grouped-query attention.
LLaMA-3/3.1 [130]: A collection of models trained on a
seven times larger dataset as compared to LLaMA-2 with dou-
ble the context length, outperforming its previous variants and
other models.
PanGu-Σ [92]: An autoregressive model with parameters
copied from PanGu-α and extended to a trillion scale with Ran-
dom Routed Experts (RRE), the architectural diagram is shown
in Figure 10. RRE is similar to the MoE architecture, with
distinctions at the second level, where tokens are randomly
routed to experts in a domain instead of using a learnable gat-
ing method. The model has bottom layers densely activated and
shared across all domains, whereas top layers are sparsely ac-
tivated according to the domain. This training style allows for
extracting task-specific models and reduces catastrophic forget-
ting effects in the case of continual learning.
Mixtral8x22b [131]: A mixture-of-experts (MoE) model with
eight distinct experts routes each token to two experts at each
layer and combines the outputs additively.
Snowflake Arctic [132]: Arctic LLM is a hybrid of dense and
mixture-of-experts (MoE) architecture. The MoE (128×3.66B
MLP experts) is parallel to the dense transformer (10B) with
only two experts activated. The model has many experts, com-
pared to other MoE LLMs [131, 133], to increase the model
capacity and provide an opportunity to choose among many ex-
perts for a diverse configuration. The model has 480B param-
eters, and only 17B are active during a forward pass, reducing
the computation significantly.
Grok [133, 134]: Grok is a family of LLMs including Grok-1
and Grok-1.5, released by XAI.
Grok-1 [133]: Grok-1 is a 314B parameters language MoE
model (eight experts), where two experts are activated per to-
ken.
Grok-1.5 [134]: Grok-1.5 is a multi-modal LLM with a larger
context length and improved performance.
Gemini [135, 136]: Gemini replaces Bard (based on PaLM)
with multi-modal capabilities and significant language model-
ing performance improvements.
Gemini-1 [135]: The first-ever auto-regressive model to
achieve human-level capabilities on the MMLU benchmark.
Gemini-1.5 [136]: A multi-modal LLM with MoE architec-
ture builds on the findings of Gemini-1. The model has a 2M
context window and can reason over information up to 10M
tokens. Such large context windows were never achieved pre-
viously and shown to have a huge impact on performance gain.
Nemotron-4 340B [137]: A decoder-only model that has been
aligned on 98% synthetic data and only 2% manually annotated
data. Utilizing synthetic data at a large proportion improves the
model performance significantly. The paper suggested intro-
ducing alignment data with a smaller subset of previously seen
data during the late stage of the model pre-training, enabling the
smooth transition from the pre-trained stage to the final train-
ing stage. To train better instruction-following models, weaker
models are trained into stronger models iteratively. The syn-
thetic data generated by the weaker instruction-tuned model is
used to train a base model which is later supervised fine-tuned
outperforming the weaker model.
DeepSeek [138]: DeepSeek studies the LLMs scaling laws
in detail to determine the optimal non-embedding model size
and training data. The experiments were performed for 8 bud-
gets ranging from 1e17 to 3e20 training FLOPs. Each compute
budget was tested against ten different models/data scales. The
batch size and learning rates were also fitted for the given com-
pute budget finding that the batch size should increase with
the increased compute budget while decreasing the learning
rate. Following are the equations for the optimal batch-size (B),
learning rate (η), model size (M), and data (D):
Bopt = 0.2920.C0.3271
ηopt = 0.3118.C−0.1250
Mopt = Mbase.Ca
Dopt = Dbase.Cb
Mbase = 0.1715, Dbase = 5.8316, a = 0.5243, b = 0.4757
(5)
DeepSeek-v2 [139]: An MoE model that introduces multi-
head latent attention (MLA) to reduce inference costs, by com-
pressing Key-Value (KV) cache into a latent vector.
MLA
achieves better performance than multi-head attention (MHA),
and other efficient attention mechanisms such as grouped query
attention (GQA), multi-query attention (MQA), etc. Because
of MLA, DeepSeek-v2 achieves 5.76 times faster inference
throughput as compared to DeepSeek [138].
10

3.1.2. Coding
CodeGen [140]:
CodeGen has a similar architecture to
PaLM [15], i.e., parallel attention, MLP layers, and RoPE em-
beddings. The model is trained on both natural language and
programming language data sequentially (trained on the first
dataset, then the second, and so on) on the following datasets
1) PILE, 2) BIGQUERY, and 3) BIGPYTHON. CodeGen pro-
posed a multi-step approach to synthesizing code. The purpose
is to simplify the generation of long sequences where the previ-
ous prompt and generated code are given as input with the next
prompt to generate the next code sequence. CodeGen open-
source a Multi-Turn Programming Benchmark (MTPB) to eval-
uate multi-step program synthesis.
Codex [141]: This LLM is trained on a subset of public Python
Github repositories to generate code from docstrings. Com-
puter programming is an iterative process where the programs
are often debugged and updated before fulfilling the require-
ments. Similarly, Codex generates 100 versions of a program
by repetitive sampling for a given description, which produces
a working solution for 77.5% of the problems passing unit tests.
Its powerful version powers Github Copilot2.
AlphaCode [142]: A set of large language models, ranging
from 300M to 41B parameters, designed for competition-level
code generation tasks. It uses the multi-query attention [143] to
reduce memory and cache costs. Since competitive program-
ming problems highly require deep reasoning and an under-
standing of complex natural language algorithms, the Alpha-
Code models are pre-trained on filtered GitHub code in popular
languages and then fine-tuned on a new competitive program-
ming dataset named CodeContests. The CodeContests dataset
mainly contains problems, solutions, and test cases collected
from the Codeforces platform3. The pre-training employs stan-
dard language modeling objectives, while GOLD [144] with
tempering [145] serves as the training objective for the fine-
tuning on CodeContests data. To evaluate the performance of
AlphaCode, simulated programming competitions are hosted
on the Codeforces platform: overall, AlphaCode ranks at the
top 54.3% among over 5000 competitors, where its Codeforces
rating is within the top 28% of recently participated users.
CodeT5+ [34]: CodeT5+ is based on CodeT5 [146], with
shallow encoder and deep decoder, trained in multiple stages
initially unimodal data (code) and later bimodal data (text-code
pairs). Each training stage has different training objectives and
activates different model blocks encoder, decoder, or both ac-
cording to the task. The unimodal pre-training includes span
denoising and CLM objectives, whereas bimodal pre-training
objectives contain contrastive learning, matching, and CLM for
text-code pairs. CodeT5+ adds special tokens with the text to
enable task modes, for example, [CLS ] for contrastive loss,
[Match] for text-code matching, etc.
StarCoder [147]: A decoder-only model with the SantaCoder
architecture, employing Flash attention to scale up the context
length to 8k. The StarCoder trains an encoder to filter names,
2https://github.com/features/copilot
3https://codeforces.com/
emails, and other personal data from the training data. Its fine-
tuned variant outperforms PaLM, LLaMA, and LAMDA on
HumanEval and MBPP benchmarks.
3.1.3. Scientific Knowledge
Galactica [148]: A large curated corpus of human scientific
knowledge with 48 million papers, textbooks, lecture notes,
millions of compounds and proteins, scientific websites, en-
cyclopedias, and more are trained using the metaseq library3,
which is built on PyTorch and fairscale [149]. The model wraps
reasoning datasets with the < work > token to provide step-by-
step reasoning context to the model, which has been shown to
improve the performance on reasoning tasks.
3.1.4. Dialog
LaMDA [150]: A decoder-only model pre-trained on pub-
lic dialog data, public dialog utterances, and public web doc-
uments, where more than 90% of the pre-training data is in
English. LaMDA is trained with the objective of producing re-
sponses that exhibit high levels of quality, safety, and grounded-
ness. To achieve this, discriminative and generative fine-tuning
techniques are incorporated to enhance the model’s safety and
quality aspects. As a result, the LaMDA models can be utilized
as a general language model performing various tasks.
3.1.5. Finance
BloombergGPT [151]: A non-causal decoder model trained
using both financial (“FINPILE” from the Bloomberg archive)
and general-purpose datasets. The model’s architecture is sim-
ilar to the BLOOM [13] and OPT [14]. It allocates 50B param-
eters to different blocks of the model using the approach [113].
For effective training, BloombergGPT packs documents to-
gether with < |endoftext| > to use the maximum sequence
length, uses warmup batch size starting from 1024 to 2048, and
manually reduces the learning rate multiple times during the
training.
Xuan Yuan 2.0 [152]: A Chinese financial chat model with
BLOOM’s [13] architecture trained on a combination of general
purpose, financial, general purpose instructions, and financial
institutions datasets. Xuan Yuan 2.0 combined the pre-training
and fine-tuning stages to avoid catastrophic forgetting.
3.2. Fine-Tuned LLMs
Pre-trained LLMs have excellent generalization abilities to
unseen tasks. However, because they are generally trained with
the objective of next token prediction, LLMs have limited ca-
pacity to follow user intent and are prone to generate unethical,
toxic or inaccurate responses [20]. For their effective utiliza-
tion, LLMs are fine-tuned to follow instructions [16, 17, 97] and
generate safe responses [20], which also results in increasing
zero-shot, few-shot, and cross-task generalization [97, 16, 18],
with minimal compute increment, e.g., 0.2% of the total pre-
training for PaLM 540B [16].
We review various fine-tuned LLMs and strategies for effective
fine-tuning in this section.
11

Table 1: Noteworthy findings and insights of pre-trained Large Language Models.
Models
Findings & Insights
T5
• Encoder and decoder with shared parameters perform equivalently when parameters are not shared
• Fine-tuning model layers (adapter layers) work better than the conventional way of training on only
classification layers
GPT-3
• Few-shot performance of LLMs is better than the zero-shot, suggesting that LLMs are meta-
learners
mT5
• Large multi-lingual models perform equivalently to single language models on downstream tasks.
However, smaller multi-lingual models perform worse
PanGu-α
• LLMs have good few shot capabilities
CPM-2
• Prompt fine-tuning requires updating very few parameters while achieving performance compara-
ble to full model fine-tuning
• Prompt fine-tuning takes more time to converge as compared to full model fine-tuning
• Inserting prompt tokens in-between sentences can allow the model to understand relations between
sentences and long sequences
• In an analysis, CPM-2 finds that prompts work as a provider (additional context) and aggregator
(aggregate information with the input text) for the model
ERNIE 3.0
• A modular LLM architecture with a universal representation module and task-specific representa-
tion module helps in the finetuning phase
• Optimizing the parameters of a task-specific representation network during the fine-tuning phase is
an efficient way to take advantage of the powerful pre-trained model
Jurassic-1
• The performance of LLM is highly related to the network size
• To improve runtime performance, more operations can be performed in parallel (width) rather than
sequential (depth)
• To efficiently represent and fit more text in the same context length, the model uses a larger vo-
cabulary to train a SentencePiece tokenizer without restricting it to word boundaries. This further
benefits in few-shot learning tasks
HyperCLOVA
• By employing prompt-based tuning, the performances of models can be improved, often surpassing
those of state-of-the-art models when the backward gradients of inputs are accessible
Yuan 1.0
• The model architecture that excels in pre-training and fine-tuning cases may exhibit contrasting
behavior in zero-shot and few-shot learning
Gopher
• Relative encodings enable the model to evaluate for longer sequences than training.
ERNIE 3.0 Titan
• Additional self-supervised adversarial loss to distinguish between real and generated text improves
the model performance as compared to ERNIE 3.0
GPT-NeoX-20B
• Parallel attention + FF layers speed-up training 15% with the same performance as with cascaded
layers
• Initializing feed-forward output layers before residuals with scheme in [153] avoids activations
from growing with increasing depth and width
• Training on Pile outperforms GPT-3 on five-shot
Table Continued on Next Page
12

Models
Findings & Insights
OPT
• Restart training from an earlier checkpoint with a lower learning rate if loss diverges
• Model is prone to generate repetitive text and stuck in a loop
Galactica
• Galactica’s performance has continued to improve across validation set, in-domain, and out-of-
domain benchmarks, even with multiple repetitions of the corpus, which is superior to existing
research on LLMs
• A working memory token approach can achieve strong performance over existing methods on
mathematical MMLU and MATH benchmarks. It sets a new state-of-the-art on several downstream
tasks such as PubMedQA (77.6%) and MedMCQA dev (52.9%)
GLaM
• The model capacity can be maintained at reduced computation by replacing the feed-forward layer
in each transformer layer with a mixture-of-experts (MoE)
• The model trained on filtered data shows consistently better performances on both NLG and NLU
tasks, where the effect of filtering is more significant on the former tasks
• Filtered pretraining corpora play a crucial role in the generation capability of LLMs, especially for
the downstream tasks
• The scaling of GLaM MoE models can be achieved by increasing the size or number of experts in
the MoE layer. Given a fixed budget of computation, more experts contribute to a better perfor-
mance
LaMDA
• The model can be fine-tuned to learn to call different external information resources and tools
AlphaCode
• For higher effectiveness and efficiency, a transformer model can be asymmetrically constructed
with a shallower encoder and a deeper decoder
• To achieve better performances, it is necessary to employ strategies such as massively scaling
upsampling, followed by the filtering and clustering of samples into a compact set
• The utilization of novel sampling-efficient transformer architectures designed to facilitate large-
scale sampling is crucial
• Simplifying problem descriptions can effectively improve the model’s performance
Chinchilla
• The model size and the number of training tokens should be scaled proportionately: for each dou-
bling of the model size, the number of training tokens should be doubled as well
PaLM
• English-centric models produce better translations when translating to English as compared to non-
English
• Generalized models can have equivalent performance for language translation to specialized small
models
• Larger models have a higher percentage of training data memorization
• Performance has not yet saturated even at 540B scale, which means larger models are likely to
perform better
AlexaTM
• Encoder-decoder architecture is more suitable to train LLMs given bidirectional attention to the
context than decoder-only
• Causal Language Modeling (CLM) task can be added to benefit the model with efficient in-context
learning
• Placing layer norm at the beginning of each transformer layer improves the training stability
Table Continued on Next Page
13

Models
Findings & Insights
U-PaLM
• Training with a mixture of denoisers outperforms PaLM when trained further for a few more FLOPs
• Training with a mixture of denoisers improves the infilling ability and open-ended text generation
diversity
UL2
• Mode switching training enables better performance on downstream tasks
• CoT prompting outperforms standard prompting for UL2
GLM-130B
• Pre-training data with a small proportion of multi-task instruction data improves the overall model
performance
CodeGen
• Multi-step prompting for code synthesis leads to a better user intent understanding and code gen-
eration
LLaMA
• A constant performance improvement is observed when scaling the model
• Smaller models can achieve good performances with more training data and computing time
PanGu-Σ
• Sparse models provide the benefits of large models at a lower computation cost
• Randomly Routed Experts reduces catastrophic forgetting effects which in turn is essential for
continual learning
• Randomly Routed Experts allow extracting a domain-specific sub-model in deployment which is
cost-efficient while maintaining a performance similar to the original
BloombergGPT
• Pre-training with general-purpose and task-specific data improves task performance without hurt-
ing other model capabilities
XuanYuan 2.0
• Combining pre-training and fine-tuning stages in single training avoids catastrophic forgetting
CodeT5+
• Causal LM is crucial for a model’s generation capability in encoder-decoder architectures
• Multiple training objectives like span corruption, Causal LM, matching, etc complement each other
for better performance
StarCoder
• HHH prompt by Anthropic allows the model to follow instructions without fine-tuning
LLaMA-2
• Model trained on unfiltered data is more toxic but may perform better on downstream tasks after
fine-tuning
• Model trained on unfiltered data requires fewer samples for safety alignment
PaLM-2
• Data quality is important to train better models
• Model and data size should be scaled with 1:1 proportions
• Smaller models trained for larger iterations outperform larger models
LLaMA-3/3.1
• Increasing batch size gradually stabilizes the training without loss spikes
• High-quality data at the final stages of training improves the model performance
• Increasing model context length windows step-wise allows it to better adapt to various sequence
lengths
Nemotron-40B
• Model aligned iteratively on synthetic data with data generated from the previously aligned model
achieves competitive performance
DeepSeek
• Batch size should increase with the increase in compute budget while decreasing the learning rate
DeepSeek-v2
• Mult-head latent attention (MLA) performs better than multi-head attention (MHA) while requiring
a significantly smaller KV cache, therefore achieving faster data generation
14

Table 2: Key insights and findings from the study of instruction-tuned Large Language Models.
Models
Findings & Insights
T0
• Multi-task prompting enables zero-shot generalization and outperforms baselines
• Even a single prompt per dataset task is enough to improve performance
WebGPT
• To aid the model in effectively filtering and utilizing relevant information, human labelers play a
crucial role in answering questions regarding the usefulness of the retrieved documents
• Interacting a fine-tuned language model with a text-based web-browsing environment can improve
end-to-end retrieval and synthesis via imitation learning and reinforcement learning
• Generating answers with references can make labelers easily judge the factual accuracy of answers
Tk-INSTRUCT
• Instruction tuning leads to a stronger generalization of unseen tasks
• More tasks improve generalization whereas only increasing task instances does not help
• Supervised trained models are better than generalized models
• Models pre-trained with instructions and examples perform well for different types of inputs
mT0 and BLOOMZ
• Instruction tuning enables zero-shot generalization to tasks never seen before
• Multi-lingual training leads to even better zero-shot generalization for both English and non-
English
• Training on machine-translated prompts improves performance for held-out tasks with non-English
prompts
• English only fine-tuning on multilingual pre-trained language model is enough to generalize to
other pre-trained language tasks
OPT-IML
• Creating a batch with multiple task examples is important for better performance
• Only example proportional sampling is not enough, training datasets should also be proportional
for better generalization/performance
• Fully held-out and partially supervised tasks performance improves by scaling tasks or categories
whereas fully supervised tasks have no effect
• Including small amounts i.e. 5% of pretraining data during fine-tuning is effective
• Only 1% reasoning data improves the performance, adding more deteriorates performance
• Adding dialogue data makes the performance worse
Sparrow
• Labelers’ judgment and well-defined alignment rules help the model generate better responses
• Good dialogue goals can be broken down into detailed natural language rules for the agent and the
raters
• The combination of reinforcement learning (RL) with reranking yields optimal performance in
terms of preference win rates and resilience against adversarial probing
Flan
• Finetuning with CoT improves performance on held-out tasks
• Fine-tuning along with CoT data improves reasoning abilities
• CoT tuning improves zero-shot reasoning
• Performance improves with more tasks
• Instruction fine-tuning improves usability which otherwise is challenging for pre-trained models
• Improving the model’s performance with instruction tuning is compute-efficient
• Multitask prompting enables zero-shot generalization abilities in LLM
WizardCoder
• Fine-tuning with re-written instruction-tuning data into a complex set improves performance
LLaMA-2-Chat
• Model learns to write safe responses with fine-tuning on safe demonstrations, while additional
RLHF step further improves model safety and make it less prone to jailbreak attacks
LIMA
• Less high quality data is enough for fine-tuned model generalization
15

Figure 10: This example illustrates the PanGu-P architecture, as depicted in
the image sourced from [92].
3.2.1. Instruction-Tuning with Manually Created Datasets
Numerous hand-crafted instruction-tuning datasets with
different design choices are proposed in the literature to
instruction-tune LLMs. The performance of fine-tuned LLMs
depends on multiple factors, such as dataset, instruction diver-
sity, prompting templates, model size, and training objectives.
Keeping this in view, diverse fine-tuned models have emerged
in the literature using manually created datasets.
The models T0 [17] and mT0 (multi-lingual) [154] employ
templates to convert existing datasets into prompt datasets.
They have shown improvements in generalization to zero-shot
and held-out tasks. Tk-Instruct [18] fine-tuned the T5 model
with in-context instructions to study generalization on unseen
tasks when given in-context instructions during test time. The
model outperformed Instruct-GPT, despite being smaller in
size, i.e., 11B parameters as compared to 175B of GPT-3.
Increasing Tasks and Prompt Setups: Zero-shot and few-shot
performance improves significantly by expanding task collec-
tion and prompt styles. OPT-IML [97] and Flan [16] curated
larger 2k and 1.8k task datasets, respectively. While increasing
task size alone is not enough, OPT-IML and Flan add more
prompting setups in their datasets, zero-shot, few-shot, and
CoT. In continuation, CoT Collection [101] fine-tunes Flan-T5
further on 1.88M CoT samples. Another method [102] uses
symbolic tasks with tasks in T0, Flan, etc.
3.2.2. Instruction-Tuning with LLMs Generated Datasets
Generating an instruction-tuning dataset requires carefully
writing instructions and input-output pairs, which are often
written by humans, smaller in size, and less diverse. To over-
come this, self-instruct [19] proposed an approach to prompt
available LLMs to generate instruction-tuning datasets. Self-
instruct outperformed models trained on manually created
dataset SUPER-NATURALINSTRUCTIONS (a dataset with
1600+ tasks) [18] by 33%. It starts with a seed of 175 tasks, 1
instruction, and 1 sample per task and iteratively generates new
instructions (52k) and instances (82k input-output pairs) using
Figure 11: An example image shows an instance of the Flan training paradigm,
taken from [16].
GPT-3 [6]. Contrary to this, Dynosaur [155] uses the meta-data
of datasets on Huggingface to prompt LLMs to generate multi-
ple task instruction-tuning datasets.
LLaMA Tuned: Various models in the literature instruction-
tune LLaMA [156] with GPT-3 [6] or GPT-4 [157] gener-
ated datasets.
Among these, Alpaca [158], Vicuna [159],
and LLaMA-GPT-4 [160] are a few general-purpose fine-tuned
models, where Alpaca is trained on 52k samples from text-
davinci-003, Vicuna on 70k samples from ShareGPT.com, and
LLaMA-GPT-4 by re-creating Alpaca instructions from GPT-
4. Goat [161] fine-tunes LLaMA for arithmetic tasks (1 million
samples) by generating data from ChatGPT and outperforms
GPT-4, PaLM, BLOOM, OPT, etc., attributing its success to the
LLaMA’s consistent tokenization of numbers. HuaTuo [162] is
a medical knowledge model, fine-tuned with a generated QA
dataset of 8k instructions.
Complex Instructions: Evol-Instruct [163, 164] prompts LLMs
to convert given instructions into a more complex set. The in-
structions are iteratively evolved with re-writing instructions in
complex wording and creating new instructions. With this style
of automated instruction generation, WizardLM [163] (fine-
tuned LLaMA on 250k instructions), outperforms Vicuna and
Alpaca, and WizardCoder [164] (fine-tuned StarCoder) beats
Claude-Plus, Bard, and others.
3.2.3. Aligning with Human Preferences
Incorporating human preferences into LLMs presents a
significant advantage in mitigating undesirable behaviors and
ensuring accurate outputs. The initial work on alignment, such
as InstructGPT [20] aligns GPT-3 using a 3-step approach,
instruction-tuning, reward modeling, and fine-tuning with
reinforcement learning (RL). The supervised fine-tuned GPT-3
on demonstrations is queried to generate responses, which
human labelers rank according to human values, and a reward
model is trained on the ranked data. Lastly, the GPT-3 is trained
with proximal policy optimization (PPO) using rewards on the
generated data from the reward model. LLaMA 2-Chat [21]
improves alignment by dividing reward modeling into help-
fulness and safety rewards and using rejection sampling in
addition to PPO. The initial four versions of LLaMA 2-Chat
are fine-tuned with rejection sampling and then with PPO on
16

top of rejection sampling.
Aligning with Supported Evidence: This style of alignment
allows the model to generate responses with proofs and facts,
reduces hallucination, and assists humans more effectively,
which increases trust in the model’s output.
Similar to
the RLHF training style, a reward model is trained to rank
generated responses containing web citations in answers
to questions, which is later used to train the model, as in
GopherCite [165], WebGPT [166], and Sparrow [167]. The
ranking model in Sparrow [167] is divided into two branches,
preference reward and rule reward, where human annotators
adversarial probe the model to break a rule. These two rewards
together rank a response to train with RL.
Aligning Directly with SFT: The PPO in the RLHF pipeline
is complex, memory-intensive, and unstable, requiring mul-
tiple models, reward, value, policy, and reference models.
Avoiding this sophisticated alignment pipeline is possible by
incorporating minimal changes in the supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) pipeline as in [168, 169, 170], with better or compa-
rable performance to PPO. Direct preference optimization
(DPO) [168] trains a model directly on the human-preferred
responses to maximize the likelihood of preferred against
unpreferred responses, with per-sample importance weight.
Reward ranked fine-tuning RAFT [169] fine-tunes the model
on ranked responses by the reward model. Preference ranking
optimization (PRO) [171] and RRHF [170] penalize the model
to rank responses with human preferences and supervised loss.
On the other hand, chain-of-hindsight (CoH) [172] provides
feedback to the model in language rather than reward, to learn
good versus bad responses.
Aligning with Synthetic Feedback:
Aligning LLMs with
human feedback is slow and costly. The literature suggests a
semi-automated process to align LLMs by prompting LLMs to
generate helpful, honest, and ethical responses to the queries,
and fine-tuning using the newly created dataset. Constitutional
AI [173] replaces human feedback in RLHF with AI, calling
it RL from AI feedback (RLAIF). AlpacaFarm [174] designs
prompts to imitate human feedback using LLMs APIs. Oppo-
site to constitutional AI, AlpacaFarm injects noise in feedback
to replicate human mistakes.
Self-Align [98] prompts the
LLM with ICL examples, instructing the LLM about what the
response should contain to be considered useful and ethical.
The same LLM is later fine-tuned with the new dataset.
Aligning with Prompts: LLMs can be steered with prompts to
generate desirable responses without training [175, 176]. The
self-correction prompting in [176] concatenates instructions
and CoT with questions, guiding the model to answer its
instruction following a strategy to ensure moral safety before
the actual answer. This strategy is shown to reduce the harm in
generated responses significantly.
Red-Teaming/Jailbreaking/Adversarial
Attacks:
LLMs
exhibit harmful behaviors, hallucinations, leaking personal in-
formation, and other shortcomings through adversarial probing.
The models are susceptible to generating harmful responses
even though they are aligned for safety [177, 178].
Red-
teaming is a common approach to address illicit outputs, where
the LLMs are prompted to generate harmful outputs [178, 179].
The dataset collected through red-teaming is used to fine-tune
models for safety. While red-teaming largely relies on human
annotators, another work [180] red-team LLMs to find prompts
that lead to harmful outputs for other LLMs.
3.2.4. Continue Pre-Training
Although fine-tuning boosts a model’s performance, it leads
to catastrophic forgetting of previously learned information.
Concatenating fine-tuning data with a few randomly selected
pre-training samples in every iteration avoids network forget-
ting [181, 152]. This is also effective in adapting LLMs for
cases where fine-tuning data is small and the original capac-
ity is to be maintained. Prompt-based continued pre-training
(PCP) [182] trains the model with text and instructions related
to tasks and then finally instruction-tunes the model for down-
stream tasks.
3.2.5. Sample Efficiency
While fine-tuning data is generally many-fold smaller than
the pre-training data, it still has to be large enough for accept-
able performance [16, 97, 18] and requires proportional com-
puting resources. Studying the effects on performance with less
data, existing literature [183, 184] finds that models trained
on less data can outperform models trained with more data.
In [183], 25% of the total downstream data is found enough
for state-of-the-art performance. Selecting coreset-based 0.5%
of the total instruction-tuning data improves the model perfor-
mance by 2% in [184], as compared to the complete data tun-
ing. Less is more for alignment (LIMA) [185] uses only 1000
carefully created demonstrations to fine-tune the model and has
achieved comparable performance to GPT-4.
3.3. Increasing Context Window
LLMs are trained with limited context windows due to ex-
pensive attention and high memory requirements.
A model
trained on limited sequence lengths fails to generalize to unseen
lengths at inference time [186, 49]. Alternatively, LLMs with
ALiBi [65] positional encodings can perform zero-shot length
extrapolation. However, ALiBi has less expressive power [66]
and inferior performance on multiple benchmarks [46], and
many LLMs use RoPE positional embedding that is unable to
perform zero-shot extrapolation. A larger context length has
benefits such as a better understanding of longer documents,
more samples in in-context learning, execution of bigger rea-
soning processes, etc. Expanding context length during fine-
tuning is slow, inefficient, and computationally expensive [49].
Therefore, researchers employ various context window extrap-
olation techniques discussed below.
Position Interpolation: Rather than extrapolating, [49] shows
that interpolating position encodings within the pre-trained con-
text window are more effective. The work demonstrates that
only 1000 steps of fine-tuning are enough to achieve better re-
sults on larger windows without reducing performance com-
pared to the original context size. Giraffe [46] uses power scal-
ing in RoPE, and YaRN [47] proposed NTK-aware interpola-
tion.
17

Efficient Attention Mechanism:
Dense global attention is
one of the major constraints in training larger context win-
dow LLMs.
Using efficient attention variants, such as lo-
cal, sparse, and dilated attention, reduces the computation cost
significantly.
LongT5 [48] proposes transient global atten-
tion (TGlobal), applying attention to local and global tokens
(windowed token averaging).
The model replaces attention
in T5 [10] with TGlobal attention, pre-trains the model on
4098 sequence length, fine-tunes on larger window sizes, as
large as 16k, and improves task performance on longer inputs.
This shows the extrapolation ability of TGlobal attention with
only fine-tuning. COLT5 [187] uses two branches, one with
lightweight and the other with heavyweight attention and feed-
forward layers. All tokens are processed from the lightweight
branch, and only important tokens are routed to the heavy-
weight branch. LongNet [188] replaces standard attention with
dilated attention, expanding sequence length to 1 billion tokens.
LongLoRA [189] proposes shift-short attention, used during
fine-tuning to reduce dense attention costs. However, the model
during inference uses dense attention and achieves similar per-
formance as full attention fine-tuning.
Extrapolation without Training: LM-Infinite [186] and par-
allel context windows (PCW) [190] show length extrapolation
is possible using pre-trained LLMs. LM-Infinite suggested Λ-
shaped attention applied within the original context window
limits. Likewise, PCW chunks larger inputs into the pre-trained
context lengths and applies the same positional encodings to
each chunk.
3.4. Augmented LLMs
LLMs are capable of learning from the examples concate-
nated with the input, known as context augmentation, in-
context learning (ICL), or few-shot prompting. They show ex-
cellent generalization to unseen tasks with few-shot prompt-
ing, enabling LLMs to answer queries beyond the capacity ac-
quired during training [6, 55]. These emergent abilities allow
for adapting the model without fine-tuning—a costly process.
Aside from this, hallucination, producing inaccurate, unsafe,
or factually incorrect responses, is common for LLMs, which is
avoided by augmenting contextual data. While the user can pro-
vide in-context samples in the query [54, 32], here we specifi-
cally refer to the methods that access external storage program-
matically, calling them augmented LLMs.
The literature suggests various external memory designs to aug-
ment LLMs, long-term [191, 192, 193, 194], short-term [195],
symbolic [196], and non-symbolic [197, 198]. The memory
can be maintained in different formats such as documents, vec-
tors, or databases. A few systems maintain intermediate mem-
ory representations to retain information across multiple iter-
ations [194, 192], while others extract important information
from the datasets and save it in memory for recall [199]. The
memory read and write operations are performed either with
or without LLMs cooperation [192, 200, 194, 201], acting as
a feedback signal in [195]. We discuss different types of aug-
mented LLMs below.
Figure 12: A flow diagram of Retrieval Augmented LLMs. The retriever ex-
tracts a similar context to the input and forwards it to the LLM either in simple
language or encoded through Fusion-in-Decoder (FiD). Depending on the task,
retrieval and generation may repeat multiple times.
3.4.1. Retrieval Augmented LLMs
LLMs may have limited memory and outdated information,
leading to inaccurate responses. Retrieving relevant informa-
tion from external up-to-date storage enables the LLMs to
accurately answer with references and utilize more informa-
tion. With retrieval augmentation, smaller models have been
shown to perform at par with larger models. For instance, the
11B model can become competitive to 540B PaLM in [25] and
7.5B to 280B Gopher in [193]. Retrieval augmented language
modeling (RALM) has two major components, shown in
Figure 12, namely: 1) retriever and 2) language model.
In
RALM, the retriever plays a crucial role in driving LLM
response, where incorrect information can steer LLMs to false
behavior. This leads to the development of various methods to
retrieve accurate information and fuse with the query for better
performance.
Zero-Shot Retrieval Augmentation: This kind of augmen-
tation keeps the original LLM architecture and weights
unchanged and uses BM25 [202], nearest neighbors, or frozen
pre-trained models like Bert [7] as a retriever. The retrieved
information is provided as input to the model for response
generation, shown to improve performance over LLMs without
retrieval [198, 203].
In some scenarios, multiple retrieval
iterations are required to complete the task.
The output
generated in the first iteration is forwarded to the retriever
to fetch similar documents. Forward-looking active retrieval
(FLARE) [197] initially generates the response and corrects
the output by retrieving relevant documents if the response
contains low-confidence tokens. Similarly, RepoCoder [204]
fetches code snippets recursively for code completion.
Training with Retrieval Augmentation: To reduce failures in
retrieval augmentation generation (RAG), researchers train or
fine-tune retrievers and LLMs with a retrieval augmentation
pipeline. We discuss the literature below based on their focus
on the respective training processes of the pipeline.
Training LLM: Retrieval-enhanced transformer (RETRO) [193]
shows pre-training smaller LLMs with RAG pipeline outper-
forms larger LLMs, such as GPT-3 trained without RAG.
RETRO uses a 2-trillion token subset of MassiveText as
18
