LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AS OPTIMIZERS
Chengrun Yang*
Xuezhi Wang
Yifeng Lu
Hanxiao Liu
Quoc V. Le
Denny Zhou
Xinyun Chen*
{chengrun, xuezhiw, yifenglu, hanxiaol}@google.com
{qvl, dennyzhou, xinyunchen}@google.com
Google DeepMind
* Equal contribution
ABSTRACT
Optimization is ubiquitous. While derivative-based algorithms have been powerful
tools for various problems, the absence of gradient imposes challenges on many
real-world applications. In this work, we propose Optimization by PROmpting
(OPRO), a simple and effective approach to leverage large language models (LLMs)
as optimizers, where the optimization task is described in natural language. In
each optimization step, the LLM generates new solutions from the prompt that
contains previously generated solutions with their values, then the new solutions are
evaluated and added to the prompt for the next optimization step. We first showcase
OPRO on linear regression and traveling salesman problems, then move on to our
main application in prompt optimization, where the goal is to find instructions
that maximize the task accuracy. With a variety of LLMs, we demonstrate that
the best prompts optimized by OPRO outperform human-designed prompts by
up to 8% on GSM8K, and by up to 50% on Big-Bench Hard tasks. Code at
https://github.com/google-deepmind/opro.
0
50
100
150
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
training accuracy
GSM8K
(a) GSM8K
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
60.0
80.0
100.0
training accuracy
BBH
movie_recommendation
(b) BBH movie_recommendation
Figure 1: Prompt optimization on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and BBH (Suzgun et al., 2022)
movie_recommendation. The optimization on GSM8K has pre-trained PaLM 2-L as the scorer and
the instruction-tuned PaLM 2-L (denoted PaLM 2-L-IT) as the optimizer; the optimization on
BBH movie_recommendation has text-bison as the scorer and PaLM 2-L-IT as the optimizer.
Each dot is the average accuracy across all (up to 8) generated instructions in the single step, and the
shaded region represents standard deviation. See Section 5 for more details on experimental setup.
Table 1: Top instructions with the highest GSM8K zero-shot test accuracies from prompt optimization
with different optimizer LLMs. All results use the pre-trained PaLM 2-L as the scorer.
Source
Instruction
Acc
Baselines
(Kojima et al., 2022)
Let’s think step by step.
71.8
(Zhou et al., 2022b)
Let’s work this out in a step by step way to be sure we have the right answer.
58.8
(empty string)
34.0
Ours
PaLM 2-L-IT
Take a deep breath and work on this problem step-by-step.
80.2
PaLM 2-L
Break this down.
79.9
gpt-3.5-turbo
A little bit of arithmetic and a logical approach will help us quickly arrive at
the solution to this problem.
78.5
gpt-4
Let’s combine our numerical command and clear thinking to quickly and
accurately decipher the answer.
74.5
1
arXiv:2309.03409v3  [cs.LG]  15 Apr 2024

Large Language Models as Optimizers
1
INTRODUCTION
Optimization is critical for all areas. Many optimization techniques are iterative: the optimization
starts from an initial solution, then iteratively updates the solution to optimize the objective func-
tion (Amari, 1993; Qian, 1999; Kingma & Ba, 2015; Bäck & Schwefel, 1993; Rios & Sahinidis,
2013; Reeves, 1993). The optimization algorithm typically needs to be customized for an individual
task to deal with the specific challenges posed by the decision space and the performance landscape,
especially for derivative-free optimization.
In this work, we propose Optimization by PROmpting (OPRO), a simple and effective approach to
utilize large language models (LLMs) as optimizers. With the advancement of prompting techniques,
LLMs have achieved impressive performance in various domains (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022a; Madaan et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023e).
Their ability to understand natural language lays out a new possibility for optimization: instead of
formally defining the optimization problem and deriving the update step with a programmed solver,
we describe the optimization problem in natural language, then instruct the LLM to iteratively generate
new solutions based on the problem description and the previously found solutions. Optimization
with LLMs enables quick adaptation to different tasks by changing the problem description in the
prompt, and the optimization process can be customized by adding instructions to specify the desired
properties of the solutions.
To demonstrate the potential of LLMs for optimization, we first present case studies on linear
regression and the traveling salesman problem, which are two classic optimization problems that
underpin many others in mathematical optimization, computer science, and operations research. On
small-scale optimization problems, we show that LLMs are able to find good-quality solutions simply
through prompting, and sometimes match or surpass hand-designed heuristic algorithms.
Next, we demonstrate the ability of LLMs to optimize prompts: the goal is to find a prompt that
maximizes the task accuracy. Specifically, we focus on natural language tasks where both the task
input and output are texts. LLMs are shown to be sensitive to the prompt format (Zhao et al., 2021;
Lu et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2023; Madaan & Yazdanbakhsh, 2022); in particular, semantically similar
prompts may have drastically different performance (Kojima et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022b; Zhang
et al., 2023), and the optimal prompt formats can be model-specific and task-specific (Ma et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023c). Therefore, prompt engineering is often important for LLMs to achieve good
performance (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021). However, the large and discrete prompt space makes it
challenging for optimization, especially when only API access to the LLM is available. Following
prior work on continuous and discrete prompt optimization (Lester et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021;
Zhou et al., 2022b; Pryzant et al., 2023), we assume a training set is available to compute the training
accuracy as the objective value for optimization, and we show in experiments that optimizing the
prompt for accuracy on a small training set is sufficient to reach high performance on the test set.
The prompt to the LLM serves as a call to the optimizer, and we name it the meta-prompt. Figure 3
shows an example. The meta-prompt contains two core pieces of information. The first piece is
previously generated prompts with their corresponding training accuracies. The second piece is the
optimization problem description, which includes several exemplars randomly selected from the
training set to exemplify the task of interest. We also provide instructions for the LLM to understand
the relationships among different parts and the desired output format. Different from recent work
on using LLMs for automatic prompt generation (Zhou et al., 2022b; Pryzant et al., 2023), each
optimization step in our work generates new prompts that aim to increase the test accuracy based on
a trajectory of previously generated prompts, instead of editing one input prompt according to natural
language feedback (Pryzant et al., 2023) or requiring the new prompt to follow the same semantic
meaning (Zhou et al., 2022b). Making use of the full optimization trajectory, OPRO enables the
LLM to gradually generate new prompts that improve the task accuracy throughout the optimization
process, where the initial prompts have low task accuracies.
We conduct comprehensive evaluation on several LLMs, including text-bison and Palm 2-L
in the PaLM-2 model family (Anil et al., 2023), as well as gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4 in the GPT
model family. We optimize prompts on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and Big-Bench Hard (Suzgun
et al., 2022), which are reasoning benchmarks where prompting techniques have achieved remarkable
performance breakthrough (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Suzgun et al., 2022). Starting
from initial prompts with low task accuracies, we show that all LLMs in our evaluation are able to
2

Large Language Models as Optimizers
scores
generated
solutions
LLM as
optimizer
objective function
evaluator
return top solutions
when finish
meta-prompt
solution-score pairs
task description
Figure 2: An overview of the OPRO framework. Given the meta-prompt as the input, the LLM
generates new solutions to the objective function, then the new solutions and their scores are added
into the meta-prompt for the next optimization step. The meta-prompt contains the solution-score
pairs obtained throughout optimization, a natural language description of the task, and (in prompt
optimization) a few task exemplars. Figure 3 shows a sample meta-prompt for prompt optimization.
serve as optimizers, which consistently improve the performance of the generated prompts through
iterative optimization until convergence (see Figure 1). In particular, while these LLMs generally
produce instructions of different styles (see Table 1), with zero-shot prompting, their best generated
instructions match the few-shot chain-of-thought prompting performance when applied to PaLM
2-L, outperforming the zero-shot performance with human-designed prompts by up to 8% on
GSM8K. Additionally, we observe that the OPRO-optimized prompts transfer to other benchmarks
of the same domain and also deliver notable performance gain.
2
OPRO: LLM AS THE OPTIMIZER
Figure 2 illustrates the overall framework of OPRO. In each optimization step, the LLM generates
candidate solutions to the optimization task based on the optimization problem description and
previously evaluated solutions in the meta-prompt. Then the new solutions are evaluated and added to
the meta-prompt for the subsequent optimization process. The optimization process terminates when
the LLM is unable to propose new solutions with better optimization scores, or a maximum number
of optimization steps has reached. We first outline the desired features of LLMs for optimization,
then describe the key design choices based on these desirables.
2.1
DESIRABLES OF OPTIMIZATION BY LLMS
Making use of natural language descriptions. The main advantage of LLMs for optimization is
their ability of understanding natural language, which allows people to describe their optimization
tasks without formal specifications. For instance, in prompt optimization where the goal is to find a
prompt that optimizes the task accuracy, the task can be described with a high-level text summary
along with input-output examples.
Trading off exploration and exploitation. The exploration-exploitation trade-off is a fundamental
challenge in optimization, and it is important for LLMs serving as optimizers to balance these two
competing goals. This means that the LLM should be able to exploit promising areas of the search
space where good solutions are already found, while also exploring new regions of the search space
so as to not miss potentially better solutions.
2.2
META-PROMPT DESIGN
As the input to the optimizer LLM, the meta-prompt contains the following two essential parts.
Optimization problem description. The first part is the text description of the optimization problem,
including the objective function and solution constraints. For example, for prompt optimization,
the LLM can be instructed to “generate a new instruction that achieves a higher accuracy”, and we
denote such instructions in the meta-prompt as meta-instructions. We can also provide customized
3

Large Language Models as Optimizers
meta-instructions as an informal regularization of the generated solutions, such as “the instruction
should be concise and generally applicable”.
Optimization trajectory. Besides understanding natural language instructions, LLMs are also
shown to be able to recognize patterns from in-context demonstrations (Wei et al., 2023; Madaan &
Yazdanbakhsh, 2022; Mirchandani et al., 2023). Our meta-prompt makes use of this property and in-
structs the LLM to leverage the optimization trajectory for generating new solutions. Specifically, the
optimization trajectory includes past solutions and their optimization scores, sorted in the ascending
order. Including optimization trajectory in the meta-prompt allows the LLM to identify similarities of
solutions with high scores, encouraging the LLM to build upon existing good solutions to construct
potentially better ones without the need of explicitly defining how the solution should be updated.
2.3
SOLUTION GENERATION
At the solution generation step, the LLM generates new solutions with the meta-prompt as input. The
following are the key optimization challenges we address in this stage.
Optimization stability. In the optimization process, not all solutions achieve high scores and
monotonically improve over prior ones. Due to the sensitivity of in-context learning to the prompt,
LLM output can be drastically affected by low-quality solutions in the input optimization trajectory,
especially at the beginning when the solution space has not been adequately explored. This sometimes
results in optimization instability and large variance. To improve stability, we prompt the LLM to
generate multiple solutions at each optimization step, allowing the LLM to simultaneously explore
multiple possibilities and quickly discover promising directions to move forward.
Exploration-exploitation trade-off. We tune the LLM sampling temperature to balance between
exploration and exploitation. A lower temperature encourages the LLM to exploit the solution space
around the previously found solutions and make small adaptations, while a high temperature allows
the LLM to more aggressively explore solutions that can be notably different.
3
MOTIVATING EXAMPLE: MATHEMATICAL OPTIMIZATION
We first demonstrate the potential of LLMs in serving as optimizers for mathematical optimization.
In particular, we present a case study on linear regression as an example of continuous optimization,
and on the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) as an example of discrete optimization. On both tasks,
we see LLMs properly capture the optimization directions on small-scale problems merely based on
the past optimization trajectory provided in the meta-prompt.
3.1
LINEAR REGRESSION
In linear regression problems, the goal is to find the linear coefficients that probabilistically best
explain the response from the input variables. We study the setting in which the independent
and dependent variables X and y are both one-dimensional and an intercept b is present, so that
there are two one-dimensional variables w, b to optimize over. In a synthetic setting, we sample
ground truth values for one-dimensional variables wtrue and btrue, and generate 50 data points by
y = wtruex + btrue + ϵ, in which x ranges from 1 to 50 and ϵ is the standard Gaussian noise. Our
optimization starts from 5 randomly sampled (w, b) pairs. In each step, we prompt an instruction-
tuned LLM with a meta-prompt that includes the best 20 (w, b) pairs in history and their sorted
objective values. The meta-prompt then asks for a new (w, b) pair that further decreases the objective
value. A sample meta-prompt is shown in Figure 19 of Appendix C.1. We prompt the meta-prompt 8
times to generate at most 8 new (w, b) pairs in each step to improve optimization stability. Then we
evaluate the objective value of the proposed pair and add it to history. We do black-box optimization:
the analytic form does not appear in the meta-prompt text. This is because the LLM can often
calculate the solution directly from the analytic form.
Table 2 summarizes the results with one of the following optimizer LLMs: text-bison,
gpt-3.5-turbo, and gpt-4. We study three settings of wtrue and btrue: within the starting
region [10, 20] × [10, 20], “near outside” (each of wtrue and btrue is outside the starting region but the
distance is less than 10), and “far outside” (each of wtrue and btrue is outside the starting region and
the distance is greater than 10). We see:
4

Large Language Models as Optimizers
Table 2: Linear regression by optimizer LLMs: the mean ± standard deviation of the number of steps
and the number of unique (w, b) pairs explored before reaching the global optima. Both w and b start
from 5 random starting points in [10, 20]. We use temperature 1.0 for all models. We run each setting
5 times. The starting points are the same across optimizer LLMs but are different across 5 runs, and
are grouped by: within the starting region, outside and close to the starting region, and outside and
farther from the starting region. Bold numbers indicate the best among three LLMs in each setting.
wtrue
btrue
number of steps
number of unique (w, b) pairs explored
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo
gpt-4
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo
gpt-4
15
14
5.8 ± 2.6
7.6 ± 4.5
4.0 ± 1.5
40.0 ± 12.4
36.0 ± 15.2
17.2 ± 5.1
17
17
4.0 ± 1.8
12.6 ± 6.0
6.0 ± 3.7
33.4 ± 11.7
53.8 ± 16.9
26.0 ± 10.6
16
10
3.8 ± 2.2
10.4 ± 5.4
6.2 ± 3.1
30.2 ± 13.4
42.8 ± 16.3
24.2 ± 8.2
3
5
9.8 ± 2.8
10.8 ± 2.7
12.2 ± 2.0
55.8 ± 16.1
39.6 ± 10.1
33.0 ± 4.0
25
23
19.6 ± 11.4
26.4 ± 18.3
12.2 ± 3.7
104.0 ± 52.3
78.6 ± 26.2
44.2 ± 8.3
2
30
31.4 ± 6.3
42.8 ± 9.7
38.0 ± 15.9
126.4 ± 17.7
125.6 ± 21.7
99.0 ± 24.6
36
-1
35.8 ± 6.4
45.4 ± 16.9
50.4 ± 18.8
174.0 ± 28.2
142.2 ± 31.2
116.4 ± 32.7
• The number of unique (w, b) pairs explored by each model is fewer than exhaustive search,
indicating these models are able to to do black-box optimization: compare the numbers and
propose a descent direction.
• The text-bison and gpt-4 models outperform gpt-3.5-turbo in convergence speed:
they arrive at the optima with fewer steps. The gpt-4 model also outperforms in finding the
optima with fewer explored unique points. Taking a closer look at the optimization trajectory, we
see gpt-4 is the best at proposing a reasonable next step from the history: for example, when
the history shows the objective values of (w, b) = (8, 7), (w, b) = (8, 6), and (w, b) = (8, 5)
are decreasing, it has a highest chance to propose (w, b) = (8, 4) for evaluation.
• The problem becomes harder for all models when the ground truth moves farther from the
starting region: all models need more explorations and more steps.
3.2
TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM (TSP)
Next, we consider the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) (Jünger et al., 1995; Gutin & Punnen, 2006),
a classical combinatorial optimization problem with numerous algorithms proposed in literature,
including heuristic algorithms and solvers (Rosenkrantz et al., 1977; Golden et al., 1980; Optimization
et al., 2020; Applegate et al., 2006; Helsgaun, 2017), and approaches based on training deep neural
networks (Kool et al., 2019; Deudon et al., 2018; Chen & Tian, 2019; Nazari et al., 2018). Specifically,
given a set of n nodes with their coordinates, the TSP task is to find the shortest route that traverses
all nodes from the starting node and finally returns to the starting node.
Our optimization process with LLMs starts from 5 randomly generated solutions, and each optimiza-
tion step produces at most 8 new solutions. We present the meta-prompt in Figure 20 of Appendix C.1.
We generate the problem instances by sampling n nodes with both x and y coordinates in [−100, 100].
We use the Gurobi solver (Optimization et al., 2020) to construct the oracle solutions and compute the
optimality gap for all approaches, where the optimality gap is defined as the difference between the
distance in the solution constructed by the evaluated approach and the distance achieved by the oracle
solution, divided by the distance of the oracle solution. Besides evaluating OPRO with different
LLMs including text-bison, gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4, we also compare OPRO to the
following heuristics:
• Nearest Neighbor (NN). Starting from an initial node, the solution is constructed with
the nearest neighbor heuristic: At each step, among the remaining nodes that are not included in
the current partial solution, NN selects the node with the shortest distance to the end node of the
partial solution, and adds it as the new end node. The process finishes when all nodes have been
added to the solution.
• Farthest Insertion (FI). One caveat of the nearest neighbor heuristic is that it does
not take the distance between the start and end node into consideration when constructing partial
solutions. To address this issue, FI aims to optimize the cost of inserting new nodes into the
partial solution at each step. Define the minimal insertion cost of adding a new node k as
5

Large Language Models as Optimizers
Table 3: Results of the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) with different number of nodes n, where
each n contains 5 problems. “# steps” calculates the mean ± standard error of optimization steps
for successful runs that find the optimal solution. “# successes” counts the number of problems that
OPRO results in the optimal solution. When no optimal solution is found for any evaluated problem,
the corresponding number of steps is N/A.
n
optimality gap (%)
# steps (# successes)
NN
FI
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo
gpt-4
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo
gpt-4
10
13.0 ± 1.3
3.2 ± 1.4
0.0 ± 0.0
0.0 ± 0.0
0.0 ± 0.0
40.4 ± 5.6 (5)
46.8 ± 9.3 (5)
9.6 ± 3.0 (5)
15
9.4 ± 3.7
1.2 ± 0.6
4.4 ± 1.3
1.2 ± 1.1
0.2 ± 0.2
N/A (0)
202.0 ± 41.1 (4)
58.5 ± 29.0 (4)
20
16.0± 3.9
0.2± 0.1
30.4 ± 10.6
4.4 ± 2.5
1.4 ± 0.6
N/A (0)
438.0 ± 0.0 (1)
195.5 ± 127.6 (2)
50
19.7 ± 3.1
9.8 ± 1.5
219.8 ± 13.7
133.0 ± 6.8
11.0 ± 2.6
N/A (0)
N/A (0)
N/A (0)
c(k) = min(i,j) d(i, k) + d(k, j) −d(i, j), where i and j are adjacent nodes in the current tour,
and d(·, ·) represents the distance between two nodes. At each step, FI adds a new node that
maximizes the minimal insertion cost.
We present the results in Table 3. We randomly generate 5 problem instances for each number of
nodes n. In addition to measuring the optimality gap, on problems where the LLM finds the optimal
solutions, we also show the number of optimization steps taken to reach the global optimum. First,
we observe that gpt-4 significantly outperforms gpt-3.5-turbo and text-bison across all
problem sizes. Specifically, on smaller-scale problems, gpt-4 reaches the global optimum about 4×
faster than other LLMs. On larger-scale problems, especially with n = 50, gpt-4 still finds solutions
with a comparable quality to heuristic algorithms, while both text-bison and gpt-3.5-turbo
get stuck at local optima with up to 20× worse optimality gaps.
On the other hand, the performance of OPRO degrades dramatically on problems with larger sizes.
When n = 10, all LLMs find the optimal solutions for every evaluated problem; as the problem size
gets larger, the OPRO optimality gaps increase quickly, and the farthest insertion heuristic starts to
outperform all LLMs in the optimality gap.
Limitations.
We would like to note that OPRO is designed for neither outperforming the state-
of-the-art gradient-based optimization algorithms for continuous mathematical optimization, nor
surpassing the performance of specialized solvers for classical combinatorial optimization problems
such as TSP. Instead, the goal is to demonstrate that LLMs are able to optimize different kinds
of objective functions simply through prompting, and reach the global optimum for some small-
scale problems. Our evaluation reveals several limitations of OPRO for mathematical optimization.
Specifically, the length limit of the LLM context window makes it hard to fit large-scale optimization
problem descriptions in the prompt, e.g., linear regression with high-dimensional data, and traveling
salesman problems with a large set of nodes to visit. In addition, the optimization landscape of some
objective functions are too bumpy for the LLM to propose a correct descending direction, causing the
optimization to get stuck halfway. We further elaborate our observed failure cases in Appendix A.
4
APPLICATION: PROMPT OPTIMIZATION
Next, we demonstrate the effectiveness of OPRO on prompt optimization, where the objective is to
find the prompt that maximizes task accuracy. We first introduce the problem setup, then illustrate
the meta-prompt design.
4.1
PROBLEM SETUP
We focus on prompt optimization for natural language tasks, where both the input and output are in
the text format. The task is represented as a dataset with training and test splits, where the training
set is used to calculate the training accuracy as the objective value during the optimization process,
and we compute the test accuracy on the test set after the optimization finishes. While traditional
optimization often requires a decently large training set, our experiment shows that a small number
or fraction of training samples (e.g., 3.5% of the training set for GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), 20%
for Big-Bench Hard (Suzgun et al., 2022)) is sufficient. The objective function evaluator is an LLM
6

Large Language Models as Optimizers
I have some texts along with their corresponding scores. The texts are arranged in ascending order
based on their scores, where higher scores indicate better quality.
text:
Let’s figure it out!
score:
61
text:
Let’s solve the problem.
score:
63
(. . . more instructions and scores ...)
The following exemplars show how to apply your text: you replace <INS> in each input with your
text, then read the input and give an output. We say your output is wrong if your output is different
from the given output, and we say your output is correct if they are the same.
input:
Q: Alannah, Beatrix, and Queen are preparing for the new school year and have been given books
by their parents. Alannah has 20 more books than Beatrix. Queen has 1/5 times more books than
Alannah. If Beatrix has 30 books, how many books do the three have together?
A: <INS>
output:
140
(. . . more exemplars ...)
Write your new text that is different from the old ones and has a score as high as possible. Write the
text in square brackets.
Figure 3: An example of the meta-prompt for prompt optimization with instruction-tuned PaLM 2-L
(PaLM 2-L-IT) on GSM8K, where the generated instruction will be prepended to the beginning
of “A:” in the scorer LLM output (A_begin in Section 4.1). <INS> denotes the position where the
generated instruction will be added. The blue text contains solution-score pairs; the purple text
describes the optimization task and output format; the orange text are meta-instructions.
to which the optimized prompt will be applied, and it can be the same or different from the LLM for
optimization. We denote the LLM for objective function evaluation as the scorer LLM, and the LLM
for optimization as the optimizer LLM.
The output of the optimizer LLM is an instruction, which is concatenated to the question part of every
exemplar and prompts the scorer LLM. We consider the following positions to insert the instruction:
• Q_begin: the instruction is added before the original question.
• Q_end: the instruction is added after the original question.
• A_begin: the instruction is added to the beginning of the scorer LLM output. This is applicable
to pretrained LLMs without instruction tuning, where the prompt is formatted as a sequence of
QA pairs.
We exemplify these prompting formats in Appendix B.
4.2
META-PROMPT DESIGN
Figure 3 shows an example of the meta-prompt for prompt optimization on GSM8K (Cobbe et al.,
2021). More details are as follows.
7

Large Language Models as Optimizers
Optimization problem examples. The problem description includes a few examples taken from the
training set to demonstrate the task for the generated instructions. For example, from the input-output
pair in Figure 3, we can infer this is a math word problem. The input-output pair also demonstrates
the position where the generated instruction will be added to, and this is essential for the optimizer
LLM to generate instructions of the same style. In each optimization step, we add several (three for
example) training examples to the meta-prompt by random sampling the training set or choose the
ones the previous instructions fall short of.
Optimization trajectory. The optimization trajectory includes instructions generated from the past
optimization steps, along with their scores. The old instructions and scores are sorted by the score in
ascending order. The score is the training accuracy in prompt optimization. We only keep instructions
with the highest scores in the meta-prompt in consideration of the LLM context length limit.
Meta-instructions. We also add meta-instructions: the instructions to the optimizer LLM that explain
the optimization goal and instruct the model how to use the above information. The meta-instructions
may also specify the desired generated instruction format for easier parsing.
5
PROMPT OPTIMIZATION EXPERIMENTS
We present the evaluation results for prompt optimization in this section. Our experiments demonstrate
that OPRO brings a significant performance gain across the board, with different combinations of
LLMs as the optimizer and the scorer.
Section 5.1 describes the experiment setup. Section 5.2 shows main results on reasoning tasks like
GSM8K and BBH. Section 5.3 shows ablation studies. Section 5.4 analyzes overfitting in prompt
optimization. Section 5.5 compares the prompt optimization performance of meta-prompts in OPRO
and EvoPrompt (Guo et al., 2023).
5.1
EVALUATION SETUP
Models. The LLMs we use as the optimizer and the scorer are:
• Optimizer LLM: Pre-trained PaLM 2-L (Anil et al., 2023), instruction-tuned PaLM 2-L
(denoted PaLM 2-L-IT), text-bison, gpt-3.5-turbo, and gpt-4.
• Scorer LLM: Pre-trained PaLM 2-L and text-bison.
With pre-trained PaLM 2-L as the scorer, the optimizer LLM generates A_begin instructions.
Since text-bison has been instruction-tuned, the optimizer LLM generates Q_begin and Q_end
instructions when text-bison is used as the scorer.
Benchmarks. Our primary evaluation benchmarks are GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and Big-Bench
Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2022). GSM8K is a benchmark of grade school math word problems
with 7,473 training samples and 1,319 test samples, where chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al.,
2022) and the zero-shot instruction “Let’s think step by step.” (Kojima et al., 2022) have drastically
improved the performance over the standard prompting. BBH is a suite of 23 challenging BIG-Bench
tasks (Srivastava et al., 2022) that covers a wide range of topics beyond arithmetic reasoning, including
symbolic manipulation and commonsense reasoning. Each task contains up to 250 examples in total.
To examine the transferability of the optimized instructions, we also evaluate the instructions op-
timized for GSM8K on two other mathematical reasoning datasets, i.e., MultiArith (Roy & Roth,
2016) and AQuA (Ling et al., 2017).
Implementation details.
We set the temperature to be 0 when evaluating the performance of
generated instructions, in which case the scorer LLM greedily decodes. Unless otherwise specified, we
set the default temperature to be 1.0 for optimizer LLMs to generate diverse and creative instructions.
At each optimization step, we prompt the optimizer LLM with the meta-prompt 8 times to generate 8
instructions, then we add these instructions with their training scores to the optimization trajectory
in the meta-prompt. Our meta-prompt at each step contains the best 20 instructions so far and 3
randomly picked exemplars from the training set. We study the effect of different hyperparameters in
ablation studies (Section 5.3). Appendix C.2 presents the full meta-prompts for different optimizer
LLMs.
8

Large Language Models as Optimizers
Table 4: Test accuracies on GSM8K. We show the instruction with the highest test accuracy for each
scorer-optimizer pair.
Scorer
Optimizer /
Source
Instruction
position
Top instruction
Acc
Baselines
PaLM 2-L
(Kojima et al.,
2022)
A_begin
Let’s think step by step.
71.8
PaLM 2-L
(Zhou et al.,
2022b)
A_begin
Let’s work this out in a step by step way to be sure we have the
right answer.
58.8
PaLM 2-L
A_begin
Let’s solve the problem.
60.8
PaLM 2-L
A_begin
(empty string)
34.0
text-bison
(Kojima et al.,
2022)
Q_begin
Let’s think step by step.
64.4
text-bison
(Zhou et al.,
2022b)
Q_begin
Let’s work this out in a step by step way to be sure we have the
right answer.
65.6
text-bison
Q_begin
Let’s solve the problem.
59.1
text-bison
Q_begin
(empty string)
56.8
Ours
PaLM 2-L
PaLM
2-L-IT
A_begin
Take a deep breath and work on this problem step-by-step.
80.2
PaLM 2-L
PaLM 2-L
A_begin
Break this down.
79.9
PaLM 2-L
gpt-3.5-turbo A_begin
A little bit of arithmetic and a logical approach will help us
quickly arrive at the solution to this problem.
78.5
PaLM 2-L
gpt-4
A_begin
Let’s combine our numerical command and clear thinking to
quickly and accurately decipher the answer.
74.5
text-bison
PaLM
2-L-IT
Q_begin
Let’s work together to solve math word problems! First, we will
read and discuss the problem together to make sure we
understand it. Then, we will work together to find the solution. I
will give you hints and help you work through the problem if
you get stuck.
64.4
text-bison
text-bison
Q_end
Let’s work through this problem step-by-step:
68.5
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo
Q_end
Analyze the given information, break down the problem into
manageable steps, apply suitable mathematical operations, and
provide a clear, accurate, and concise solution, ensuring precise
rounding if necessary. Consider all variables and carefully
consider the problem’s context for an efficient solution.
66.5
text-bison
gpt-4
Q_begin
Start by dissecting the problem to highlight important numbers
and their relations. Decide on the necessary mathematical
operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division,
required for resolution. Implement these operations, keeping in
mind any units or conditions. Round off by ensuring your
solution fits the context of the problem to ensure accuracy.
62.7
5.2
MAIN RESULTS
We show prompt optimization curves on GSM8K and two BBH tasks in this section. The curves on
other BBH tasks are deferred to Appendix D, and the tables containing all accuracy numbers are in
Appendix E.
5.2.1
GSM8K
For prompt optimization, we randomly sample 3.5% examples from the GSM8K training set. The
same subset is used throughout optimization, so that the task accuracies computed at intermediate
optimization steps are approximations of the training accuracy on all 7,473 training examples. This
balances the evaluation cost with the generalization performance. After the optimization procedure
finishes, we evaluate the found instructions on the entire GSM8K test set.
Figure 1(a) in Section 1 shows prompt optimization curves with pre-trained PaLM 2-L as scorer
and PaLM 2-L-IT as optimizer, and the initial instruction is “Let’s solve the problem” with a
(approximated, and same below) training accuracy of 60.5. We observe that the optimization curve
shows an overall upward trend with several leaps throughout the optimization process, for example:
9

Large Language Models as Optimizers
• “Let’s think carefully about the problem and solve it together.” at Step 2 with the training
accuracy 63.2;
• “Let’s break it down!” at Step 4 with training accuracy 71.3;
• “Let’s calculate our way to the solution!” at Step 5 with training accuracy 73.9;
• “Let’s do the math!” at Step 6 with training accuracy 78.2.
The optimization curves also generally show a decrease of the variance among the accuracies of
instructions generated at each step, indicating that the optimizer LLM generates distributionally
better instructions throughout the optimization.
Next, we present the results of generating Q_begin instructions with the text-bison scorer and
the PaLM 2-L-IT optimizer, starting from an empty instruction with a 57.1 training accuracy. The
optimization curve in Figure 4(a) shows a similar upward trend, during which a few leaps in the
training accuracy include:
• “Solve the following problems using the given information.” at Step 2 with training accuracy
59.8;
• “Solve the following problems by applying the given information and using the appropriate
mathematical operations.” at Step 3 with training accuracy 64.0;
• “Let’s read the problem carefully and identify the given information. Then, we can create an
equation and solve for the unknown variable.” at Step 4 with training accuracy 67.0;
• “I’m always down for solving a math word problem together. Just give me a moment to read
and understand the problem. Then, I’ll create an equation that models the problem, which I’ll
solve for the unknown variable. I also may or may not use some helpful diagrams or visuals
to understand the problem. Lastly, be sure to allow me some time to carefully check my work
before submitting any responses!” at Step 29 with training accuracy 70.1.
Note that although our default setting is to run OPRO for 200 steps in prompt optimization, we
need much fewer steps if the goal is to find some outstanding instructions. An example is that the
Figure 1(a) experiment found “Let’s do the math!” at Step 6 with training accuracy 78.2, almost
matching the “Take a deep breath and work on this problem step-by-step.” found at the 107th step
with training accuracy 80.2, at a point where the optimization curve is still trending upwards. This is
because a leap in our optimization curve does not always correspond to a much better instruction being
discovered; instead, it can be due to a large qualitative improvement of all 8 generated instructions in
this step. The latter usually happens several steps after the former: after a much better instruction is
discovered in one step, the meta-prompt gradually gets rid of worse instructions in the latter steps by
generating instructions similar to the much-better one. The top instructions kept in the meta-prompt
gradually improves in this procedure. At a point when the meta-prompt only triggers higher quality
instructions, the leap happens.
Finally, Figure 4(b) shows that the pre-trained PaLM 2-L can also serve as the optimizer LLM and
improve its own prediction performance. Different from other optimizer LLMs that are instruction-
tuned, the pre-trained PaLM 2-L performs better when the prompt is formatted in a few-shot manner.
Therefore, we include two initial instructions to start the optimization: the empty instruction (with
a training accuracy 32.2) and “The answer is” (with a training accuracy 33.3). See Figure 21 in
Appendix C for the meta-prompt format. The generated instructions follow the same style as “The
answer is”: most instructions are also phrases suitable as the prefix of a sentence, like “Here you
go:” (generated at Step 11 with training accuracy 61.3) and “Let’s do it:” (generated at Step 13 with
training accuracy 75.1).
Table 4 summarizes top instructions found on GSM8K with different scorer and optimizer LLMs.
We observe that:
• The styles of instructions found by different optimizer LLMs vary a lot: PaLM 2-L-IT and
text-bison ones are concise, while GPT ones are long and detailed.
• Although some top instructions contain the “step-by-step” phrase, most others achieve a compa-
rable or better accuracy with different semantic meanings.
10

Large Language Models as Optimizers
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
training accuracy
GSM8K
(scorer: text-bison)
(a) PaLM 2-L-IT optimizer
0
20
40
60
80
# steps
20.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
training accuracy
GSM8K
(scorer and optimizer:
PaLM 2-L)
(b) pre-trained PaLM 2-L optimizer
Figure 4: Prompt optimization on GSM8K with (a) the text-bison scorer and the PaLM 2-L-IT
optimizer, and (b) pre-trained PaLM 2-L as both scorer and optimizer.
5.2.2
BBH
On BBH, the optimization starts from an empty string as the initial instruction by default. The
instructions are placed at A_begin when the scorer is PaLM 2-L, and at Q_begin when the scorer
is text-bison. For each task, we utilize a subset of 20% examples for prompt optimization, and
the rest examples are for testing. We show experimental results on more variants of the instruction
position and initialization in Appendix E.
Figure 5 visualizes the per-task accuracy difference on all 23 BBH tasks compared to the instruction
“Let’s think step by step.” (Kojima et al., 2022) and the empty instruction, and we present the concrete
accuracies in Table 7 of Appendix E. We show that the instructions found by OPRO outperform
“Let’s think step by step.” on almost all tasks by a large margin: our instructions outperform by over
5% on 19/23 tasks with the PaLM 2-L scorer, and on 15/23 tasks with the text-bison scorer.
Our prompt optimization algorithm also improves instructions from the empty starting point by over
5% on most tasks: 20/23 with the PaLM 2-L scorer and 15/23 with the text-bison scorer.
Similar to GSM8K, we observe upward trends in optimization curves on almost all BBH tasks, as
shown in Figure 6. See Figure 23 and 24 in Appendix D for more curves on other BBH tasks.
We next show some examples of instructions found through the course of optimization. On the task
ruin_names, starting from the empty instruction (with 64.0 training accuracy), with the text-bison
scorer and the PaLM 2-L-IT optimizer, the following instructions are generated:
• “Consider the following when editing artist or movie names humorously:” at Step 1 with training
accuracy 72.0;
• “When making humorous edits of artist or movie names, you can change one or more letters or
even create puns by adding new words that sound similar.” at Step 18 with training accuracy
80.0;
• “We can make humorous edits of artist/movie names by changing letters to create new words
that are similar in sound but have different meanings. For example, The Police can be changed
to The Polite, The Abyss can be changed to Toe Abyss, and Schindler’s List can be changed to
Schindler’s Lost.” at Step 38 with training accuracy 82.0.
Although the above instructions are semantically similar, a paraphrase by the optimizer LLM offers a
notable accuracy improvement. We further highlight this observation in Section 5.2.3.
Below are some instructions generated when performing prompt optimization on temporal_sequences,
starting from the empty instruction (with the training accuracy of 64.0):
• “To solve this problem, we need to first identify the time period when the person was not seen
doing anything else. Then, we need to check if the place they went to was open during that time
period. If it was, then that is the time period when they could have gone to that place.” at Step 2
with training accuracy 42.0;
• “To find the time period when a person could have gone to a place, identify the time periods
when they were not seen doing anything else and the place was open. If there are multiple time
periods that match these criteria, then the person could have gone to the place during any of
these time periods.” at Step 18 with training accuracy 54.0;
11

Large Language Models as Optimizers
boolean_expressions
causal_judgement
date_understanding
disambiguation_qa
dyck_languages
formal_fallacies
geometric_shapes
hyperbaton
logical_deduction_seven_objects
movie_recommendation
multistep_arithmetic_two
navigate
object_counting
penguins_in_a_table
reasoning_about_colored_objects
ruin_names
salient_translation_error_detection
snarks
sports_understanding
temporal_sequences
tracking_shuffled_objects_seven_objects
web_of_lies
word_sorting
-20
0
20
40
accuracy difference
(a) PaLM 2-L scorer, ours minus “Let’s think step by step.”
boolean_expressions
causal_judgement
date_understanding
disambiguation_qa
dyck_languages
formal_fallacies
geometric_shapes
hyperbaton
logical_deduction_seven_objects
movie_recommendation
multistep_arithmetic_two
navigate
object_counting
penguins_in_a_table
reasoning_about_colored_objects
ruin_names
salient_translation_error_detection
snarks
sports_understanding
temporal_sequences
tracking_shuffled_objects_seven_objects
web_of_lies
word_sorting
0
20
40
60
accuracy difference
(b) PaLM 2-L scorer, ours minus empty starting point
boolean_expressions
causal_judgement
date_understanding
disambiguation_qa
dyck_languages
formal_fallacies
geometric_shapes
hyperbaton
logical_deduction_seven_objects
movie_recommendation
multistep_arithmetic_two
navigate
object_counting
penguins_in_a_table
reasoning_about_colored_objects
ruin_names
salient_translation_error_detection
snarks
sports_understanding
temporal_sequences
tracking_shuffled_objects_seven_objects
web_of_lies
word_sorting
0
20
40
60
accuracy difference
(c) text-bison scorer, ours minus “Let’s think step by step.”
boolean_expressions
causal_judgement
date_understanding
disambiguation_qa
dyck_languages
formal_fallacies
geometric_shapes
hyperbaton
logical_deduction_seven_objects
movie_recommendation
multistep_arithmetic_two
navigate
object_counting
penguins_in_a_table
reasoning_about_colored_objects
ruin_names
salient_translation_error_detection
snarks
sports_understanding
temporal_sequences
tracking_shuffled_objects_seven_objects
web_of_lies
word_sorting
0
20
40
accuracy difference
(d) text-bison scorer, ours minus empty starting point
Figure 5: On 23 BBH tasks, the accuracy differences among instructions found by prompt opti-
mization (with the PaLM 2-L-IT optimizer), “Let’s think step by step.”, and the empty string
(optimization starting point).
• “To determine the possible time period when a person went to a place, first identify all the time
periods when the person was not seen doing anything else and the place was open. Then, rule
out any time periods during which the person was seen doing something else. The remaining
time periods are the possible times when the person could have gone to the place.” at Step 41
with training accuracy 72.0.
Table 5 presents the best instructions generated on movie_recommendation, ruin_names, and tem-
poral_sequences tasks with different combinations of the optimizer and the scorer LLMs. Again,
12

Large Language Models as Optimizers
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
70.0
80.0
90.0
training accuracy
BBH ruin_names
(a) BBH ruin_names
0
50
100
150
# steps
30.0
50.0
70.0
training accuracy
BBH
temporal_sequences
(b) BBH temporal_sequences
Figure 6: Training accuracy curves of prompt optimization on BBH ruin_names and tempo-
ral_sequences with the text-bison scorer and the PaLM 2-L-IT optimizer. The optimizations
start from the empty string.
different optimizer LLMs produce instructions of different styles. See Appendix E for results on
more BBH tasks.
5.2.3
SEMANTICALLY SIMILAR INSTRUCTIONS MAY ACHIEVE DRASTICALLY DIFFERENT
ACCURACIES
One challenge of prompt optimization is the sensitivity of model performance to subtle changes in
the instruction. For example, with the PaLM 2-L scorer on the GSM8K test set, “Let’s think step
by step.” achieves accuracy 71.8, “Let’s solve the problem together.” has accuracy 60.5, while the
accuracy of “Let’s work together to solve this problem step by step.” is only 49.4, although it is the
semantic combination of the two upper instructions. This behavior increases both the variance across
single-step instructions and the oscillation during optimization, and motivates us to generate multiple
instructions at each step to improve the optimization stability.
5.2.4
TRANSFERABILITY OF FOUND INSTRUCTIONS
We assess the transferability of found prompts to different datasets of the same domain, where we
evaluate the top instructions found for GSM8K on two more math reasoning benchmarks Multi-
Arith (Roy & Roth, 2016) and AQuA (Ling et al., 2017). Table 6 shows that our optimized prompts
also outperform baseline prompts with different scorer LLMs on these two benchmarks.
5.3
ABLATION STUDIES
We use text-bison as the scorer and PaLM 2-L as the optimizer for all ablation studies. The
tasks we evaluate are GSM8K (math reasoning) and BBH sports_understanding (non-math reasoning).
Meta-prompt design. The meta-prompt design is crucial in achieving good prompt optimization
performance. We investigate the following core design choices:
• The order of the previous instructions. We compare the following options: (1) from lowest to
highest (our default setting); (2) from highest to lowest; (3) random. Figures 7(a) and 7(b) show
that the default setting achieves better final accuracies and converges faster. One hypothesis is
that the optimizer LLM output is affected more by the past instructions closer to the end of the
meta-prompt. This is consistent with the recency bias observed in Zhao et al. (2021), which
states that LLMs are more likely to generate tokens similar to the end of the prompt.
• The effect of instruction scores. In terms of how to present the accuracy scores, we compare three
options: (1) rounding the accuracies to integers, which is equivalent to bucketizing the accuracy
scores to 100 buckets (our default setting); (2) bucketizing the accuracies to 20 buckets; (3)
not showing the accuracies, only showing the instructions in the ascending order. Figures 7(c)
and 7(d) show that the accuracy scores assists the optimizer LLM in better understanding the
quality difference among previous instructions, and thus the optimizer LLM proposes better new
instructions that are similar to the best ones in the input optimization trajectory.
• The effect of exemplars. We compare three options: (1) showing 3 exemplars from the task
(default); (2) showing 10 exemplars from the task; (3) no exemplars. Figures 7(e) and 7(f) show
13

Large Language Models as Optimizers
Table 5: Top instructions with the highest accuracies found in prompt optimization on BBH
movie_recommendation, ruin_names, and temporal_sequences.
Scorer
Optimizer
Instruction
position
Instruction
Acc
movie_recommendation
PaLM 2-L
PaLM 2-L-IT
A_begin
Based on your input, I have analyzed the given
movies in terms of genre, plot, tone, audience rating,
year of release, director, cast, and reviews. I have also
taken into account the given options. The movie that
is most similar to the given movies in terms of all
these factors is:
90.8
PaLM 2-L
PaLM 2-L
A_begin
The best film:
88.4
PaLM 2-L
gpt-3.5-turbo A_begin
Let’s uncover the perfect movie recommendation
from the options provided, ensuring an exceptional
cinematic experience together as we select the most
captivating and satisfying choice that will keep us
thoroughly engaged and immersed until the very end.
88.0
text-bison
PaLM 2-L-IT
Q_begin
What is the highest-rated movie similar to the given
movies, with a similar IMDb rating and released in
the same year?
91.6
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo Q_begin
Based on the movie list provided, carefully consider
your preferences and make a well-informed decision.
70.8
ruin_names
PaLM 2-L
PaLM 2-L-IT
A_begin
Which is the funniest pun on the artist or movie name?
88.0
PaLM 2-L
PaLM 2-L
A_begin
Answer for ruin:
83.6
PaLM 2-L
gpt-3.5-turbo A_begin
Prepare to have a side-splittingly funny time as we
uncover the most clever and hilarious alternatives for
these artist or movie names, challenging your wit to
guess the correct one with a burst of creativity, humor,
and imaginative twists!
86.8
text-bison
PaLM 2-L-IT
Q_begin
A humorous edit of an artist or movie name can be
created by replacing one or more letters to form a new
word or phrase that sounds similar but has a different
meaning. The new word or phrase should be relevant
to the original word, but it should also be a surprise,
which makes the edit funny. For example, the artist or
movie name "Rocky" can be changed to "Ricky," and
"Schindler’s List" can be changed to "Schindler’s
Lift." Be creative and have fun!
83.6
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo Q_begin
Choose the option that offers the most clever and
humorous alteration of the given artist or movie name.
Let your creativity shine and select the answer that
will undoubtedly bring a smile to your face! Make
sure to think outside the box!
75.2
temporal_sequences (no PaLM 2-L as scorer results because its training accuracy on empty string is 100.0)
text-bison
PaLM 2-L-IT
Q_begin
To determine the time period when a person went to a
place, first identify all the time periods when the
person’s whereabouts are unknown. Then, rule out
any time periods during which the person was seen
doing something else or the place was closed. The
remaining time periods are the possible times when
the person could have gone to the place.
80.4
text-bison
gpt-3.5-turbo Q_begin
Identify the optimal time slot for the individual to
engage in the mentioned location/activity considering
the given sightings and waking up time, taking into
account the opening and closing times of the location
and the duration of each event.
53.6
14

Large Language Models as Optimizers
Table 6: Transferability across datasets: accuracies of top instructions found for GSM8K on Multi-
Arith and AQuA.
Scorer
Source
Instruction
position
Instruction
Accuracy
MultiArith
AQuA
Baselines
PaLM 2-L
(Kojima et al.,
2022)
A_begin
Let’s think step by step.
85.7
44.9
PaLM 2-L
(Zhou et al.,
2022b)
A_begin
Let’s work this out in a step by step way
to be sure we have the right answer.
72.8
48.4
PaLM 2-L
A_begin
Let’s solve the problem.
87.5
44.1
PaLM 2-L
A_begin
(empty string)
69.3
37.8
text-bison
(Kojima et al.,
2022)
Q_begin
Let’s think step by step.
92.5
31.9
text-bison
(Zhou et al.,
2022b)
Q_begin
Let’s work this out in a step by step way
to be sure we have the right answer.
93.7
32.3
text-bison
Q_begin
Let’s solve the problem.
85.5
29.9
text-bison
Q_begin
(empty string)
82.2
33.5
Ours
PaLM 2-L
PaLM 2-L-IT
on GSM8K
A_begin
Take a deep breath and work on this
problem step-by-step.
95.3
54.3
text-bison
PaLM 2-L-IT
on GSM8K
Q_begin
Let’s work together to solve math word
problems! First, we will read and
discuss the problem together to make
sure we understand it. Then, we will
work together to find the solution. I will
give you hints and help you work
through the problem if you get stuck.
96.8
37.8
that presenting exemplars in the meta-prompt is critical, as it provides information on what the
task looks like and helps the optimizer model phrase new instructions better. However, more
exemplars do not necessarily improve the performance, as a few exemplars are usually sufficient
to describe the task. In addition, including more exemplars results in a longer meta-prompt
with a dominating exemplar part, which may distract the optimizer LLM from other important
components like the optimization trajectory.
The number of generated instructions per step. Computing a mini-batch of gradients reduces
the variance of a stochastic gradient descent procedure. Similarly, generating multiple instructions
in each step improves the optimization stability with LLMs. On the other hand, to achieve better
performance with a fixed budget for the number of instructions to evaluate, the number of per-step
instructions should not be too large, so as to allow more optimization steps to incorporate richer
information of past instructions with their accuracies. Taking both aspects into consideration, Figure 8
compares the optimization performance of sampling 1 / 2 / 4 / 8 (default) / 16 instructions in each
step, showing that sampling 8 instructions at each step overall achieves the best performance.
Starting point.
We study the effect of different initial instructions for prompt optimization.
Our default setting is to start from an empty string when the scorer LLM is (instruction-tuned)
text-bison, and to start from either the empty string (on BBH tasks) or “Let’s solve the problem.”
(on GSM8K) with instruction position A_begin when the scorer LLM is the (pre-trained) PaLM 2-L.
Figure 9(a) shows the performance of text-bison as the scorer LLM with 3 options of initial
instructions: (1) the empty string; (2) “Solve the following problem.”; or (3) “Solve the following
problem.” and “Let’s solve the problem.”. We observe that the accuracies do not differ much with
different starting points. Interestingly, the styles of the generated instructions are also similar. For
example, most of the generated instructions starting from (1) and (2) contain the phrase “solve this
problem”, like “Let’s work together to solve this problem.” in Step 4 with training accuracy 64.8 from
(1), and “Let’s solve the following problems using the given information.” in Step 3 with training
accuracy 62.8 from (2).
15

Large Language Models as Optimizers
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
accuracy
ascending (default)
descending
random
(a) instruction ordering (GSM8K)
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
0.0
50.0
100.0
accuracy
ascending (default)
descending
random
(b) instruction ordering (BBH sports_understanding)
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
accuracy
100 buckets (default)
20 buckets
no scores
(c) instruction scores (GSM8K)
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
0.0
50.0
100.0
accuracy
100 buckets (default)
20 buckets
no scores
(d) instruction scores (BBH sports_understanding)
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
accuracy
3 exemplars (default)
10 exemplars
no exemplars
(e) # exemplars (GSM8K)
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
0.0
50.0
100.0
accuracy
3 exemplars (default)
10 exemplars
no exemplars
(f) # exemplars (BBH sports_understanding)
Figure 7: Ablation studies: how each part of the meta-prompt matters. The dots are the average
values across 3 optimization repetitions, and the shaded regions represent standard deviations.
16

Large Language Models as Optimizers
0
400
800
1200
1600
# evaluated instructions
50.0
60.0
70.0
accuracy
1
2
4
8 (default)
16
(a) GSM8K
0
400
800
1200
1600
# evaluated instructions
0.0
50.0
100.0
accuracy
1
2
4
8 (default)
16
(b) BBH sports_understanding
Figure 8: Ablation studies: the number of generated instructions in each step. The dots are the
average values across 3 optimization repetitions, and the shaded regions represent standard deviations.
The x-axis represents the total number of evaluated instructions through the optimization; e.g., we
run 200 optimization steps when sampling 8 instructions in each step, run 400 steps when sampling 4
instructions in each step, etc.
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
accuracy
from "" (default)
from "Solve the following problem."
from "", "Solve the following problem.",
and "Let's solve the problem."
(a) GSM8K, text-bison scorer, Q_begin
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
40.0
60.0
80.0
accuracy
from "Let's solve the problem" (default)
from ""
from "Let's think step by step."
(b) GSM8K, PaLM 2-L scorer, A_begin
Figure 9: Ablation studies: the initial instructions for prompt optimization. The dots are the
average values across 3 optimization repetitions, and the shaded regions represent standard deviations.
Figure 9(b) presents the results of of PaLM 2-L as the scorer LLM with the following options of
initial instructions: (1) “Let’s solve the problem.”; (2) the empty string; or (3) “Let’s think step
by step.”. We notice that the performance differs much more with different initial instructions,
especially at the beginning of the optimization. Specifically, starting from (1) leads to better generated
instructions than (2) in the first 30 steps, while the instructions optimized from both (1) and (2)
are worse than (3) throughout. A similar observation holds when using PaLM 2-L as scorer and
gpt-3.5-turbo as optimizer for BBH tasks, by comparing the results starting from the empty
string (Appendix E.2) and from “Let’s solve the problem.” (Appendix E.3). Taking a closer look into
the optimization process of (2), we find that although both “solve the problem” and “step by step”
show up in generated instructions at Step 5, it takes the optimizer LLM more steps to get rid of worse
instructions presented in the meta-prompt when starting from instructions with lower accuracies.
Therefore, one direction for future work is to accelerate convergence from weaker starting points.
17

Large Language Models as Optimizers
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
accuracy
0.0
0.5
1.0 (default)
1.5
2.0
(a) GSM8K
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
0.0
50.0
100.0
accuracy
0.0
0.5
1.0 (default)
1.5
2.0
(b) BBH sports_understanding
Figure 10: Ablation studies: temperature of the optimizer model. The dots are the average values
across 3 optimization repetitions, and the shaded regions represent standard deviations.
Diversity per step. We evaluate the following temperatures of the optimizer LLM: {0.0, 0.5, 1.0
(default), 1.5, 2.0}. Figure 10 shows the default temperature 1.0 achieves the best performance.
Specifically, optimizations with smaller temperatures (0.0 and 0.5) lack exploration and thus creativity,
and the optimizer LLM often gets stuck at the same instruction for tens of steps, resulting in flat
optimization curves. On the other hand, with larger temperatures (1.5 and 2.0), the optimizer LLM
more often ignores the trajectory of previous instructions presented in the meta-prompt and thus lacks
exploitation, therefore the optimization curve does not have a steady upward trend.
Comparison with one-step instruction generation. Our current iterative procedure runs for multiple
steps and generates a new batch of solutions in each step. To validate the importance of leveraging
the optimization trajectory for generating new prompts, we compare to a baseline that generates all
instructions in a single step without entering into the optimization procedure. We compare these
two approaches on GSM8K and BBH sports_understanding with the PaLM 2-L-IT optimizer.
For GSM8K the scorer LLM is pre-trained PaLM 2-L and the initial instruction is “Let’s solve
the problem”, and for BBH sports_understanding the scorer LLM is text-bison and the initial
instruction is the empty string. The baseline generates 50 instructions in a single step, thus its
meta-prompt only includes task exemplars, the initial instruction with its accuracy, and the same
meta-instructions as our full meta-prompt for performing optimization. All the other hyperparameters
remain the same.
Our results show that this one-step instruction generation performs much worse than our optimization
approach. Specifically: (1) On GSM8K, the best instruction among all 50 is still “Let’s solve the
problem”, with a 64.4 training accuracy and a 60.8 test accuracy. On the other hand, our approach
(corresponding to Figure 1(a) in the main paper) found “Let’s do the math!” with a 78.2 training
accuracy and a 76.3 test accuracy at the 5th step by generating 8 instructions at each step. (2)
Similarly, on BBH sports_understanding, the best instruction among all 50 achieved a 84.0 training
accuracy and 80.0 test accuracy. This is again worse than the instruction found by our approach at
Step 4, which achieved a 88.0 training accuracy and a 84.5 test accuracy.
5.4
OVERFITTING ANALYSIS IN PROMPT OPTIMIZATION
For simplicity, we do not set aside a validation set in our default setting of prompt optimization. We
made this decision based on the experiments when a validation set is present.
Overfitting may result in training accuracy being much higher than the validation/test accuracy. It
is difficult to avoid overfitting, but overfitting is less harmful when each candidate solution (natural
language instruction in the prompt optimization context) overfits to a similar extent. In this case, a
higher training accuracy solution still achieves a higher validation/test accuracy, and one can adopt
solutions with the highest training accuracies as the final result. Figure 11 shows this is the case for
OPRO in prompt optimization: when setting aside a validation set with the same size as the training
18
