AutoMix: Automatically Mixing Language Models
Pranjal Aggarwal♢∗
Aman Madaan♣∗
Ankit Anand ‡
Srividya Pranavi Potharaju †
Swaroop Mishra‡
Pei Zhou△
Aditya Gupta
Dheeraj Rajagopal†
Karthik Kappaganthu†
Yiming Yang♠
Shyam Upadhyay†
Manaal Faruqui†
Mausam♢
♠Carnegie Mellon University
♣xAI
† Google
‡ Google DeepMind
♢IIT Delhi
△University of Southern California
automix-models@googlegroups.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are now available from cloud API providers in
various sizes and configurations. While this diversity offers a broad spectrum
of choices, effectively leveraging the options to optimize computational cost and
performance remains challenging. In this work, we present AutoMix, an approach
that strategically routes queries to larger LMs, based on the approximate correct-
ness of outputs from a smaller LM. Central to AutoMix are two key technical
contributions. First, it has a few-shot self-verification mechanism, which estimates
the reliability of its own outputs without requiring extensive training. Second,
given that self-verification can be noisy, it employs a POMDP based router that
can effectively select an appropriately sized model, based on answer confidence.
Experiments across five language models and five challenging datasets show that
AutoMix consistently surpasses strong baselines, reducing computational cost by
over 50% for comparable performance. 1
1
Introduction
The landscape of Large Language Models (LLMs) is rapidly evolving, with a wide array of models
now available in various sizes, capabilities, and computational requirements [Touvron et al., 2023,
OpenAI, 2023, Jiang et al., 2023a]. While larger models generally exhibit superior performance,
their substantial computational costs render them unaffordable for many simpler tasks. Moreover,
the vast array of available options makes it challenging for end-users to determine the optimal
model configuration for their specific needs. This challenge is further compounded by the intrinsic
complexity and variability of real-world tasks, ranging from simple (e.g., binary classification on
separable data) to complex (e.g., code generation) and potentially unsolvable tasks (e.g., certain
forms of multi-step reasoning). To address these issues and ensure that end-users can obtain the best
performance within their budget constraints, the development of model-switching techniques has
become increasingly important. These techniques involve dispatching queries to models of disparate
sizes and capabilities, allowing for a more efficient allocation of computational resources [Liu et al.,
2020, Zhou et al., 2020, Madaan and Yang, 2022, Geng et al., 2021, Schuster et al., 2022].
Contemporary model-switching strategies often rely on separate routing models trained for a fixed
set of tasks [Chen et al., 2023, Ding et al., 2024]. Moreover, modern LLMs are frequently accessible
only through black-box APIs, restricting direct model optimization due to the unavailability of
fine-tuning capabilities and weight access. This constraint, coupled with the expectation of access
to large amounts of task-specific data, creates a challenge that existing routing approaches fail to
address adequately. In response, we introduce AutoMix, a method that enables users to mix models
∗*Equal Contribution. Work started and partly done during Aman’s internship at Google.
1Code available at github.com/automix-llm/automix
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
arXiv:2310.12963v5  [cs.CL]  19 Jan 2025

Route
LLM
Budget: 
AutoMix
LM1/LLaMA
Generate
LM1 Verifier
Self-Verify
POMDP 
Router
LM2/GPT-4
Hard?
Easy or
Unsolvable?
Budget: 
Accuracy: 
SLM
Accuracy: 
Automix automatically
optimizes cost-performance
tradeoff for users by mixing 
multiple black-box LMs
Figure 1: Representative example for 2 model setup in AutoMix. Instead of relying only on small
model (SLM) with low performance or a large model (LLM) with high cost, AutoMix automatically
mixes multiple black-box language models, based on user desired cost-quality tradeoff. AutoMix
works in a 3-step process: 1.) generation by a small model (LM1), 2.) self-verification of the
generated answer, 3.) using confidence assessments from self-verification to do appropriate routing
to a larger model (LM2). For N-model setup, the process is repeated till the final answer is reported.
of various sizes and capabilities, assuming only access to black-box LLM APIs. As illustrated in
Figure 1, AutoMix consists of 3 steps designed within the constraints of black-box access: solution
generation (small model to generate initial answer), self-verification (same smaller model assesses
difficulty), and selective routing (routing to larger models when suggested by self-verification). At
a high level, this process mirrors human problem-solving, which inherently follows a multi-step
process: generate a solution, verify its validity, and refine it further based on verification outcomes.
An ideal router in AutoMix must incorporate several key characteristics. Firstly, it should be capable
of identifying the difficulty of a query based on confidence assessments of the smaller model’s
answers. Secondly, it should be able to route to the appropriately sized model, for instance, easy
queries are routed to the small language model (SLM), hard queries to large language model (LLM),
and unlike previous works [Chen et al., 2023, Ramírez et al., 2024], unsolvable queries that no model
can solve should not be routed to any LM, thereby saving costs. Thirdly, it should be able to learn
from a small amount of data, as expected in real-world tasks. While self-verification seems a natural
choice to provide confidence assessments and learn from limited data, prior works have shown self-
verification is not particularly effective for reasoning tasks and is often noisy and ill-calibrated [Tyen
et al., 2023, Huang et al., 2023b] – a challenge that needs to be addressed. Finally, the router should
generalize to different scenarios in terms of the number of models with varying costs and capabilities.
To address these requirements, we propose two novel contributions in AutoMix. First, we formulate
self-verification as an entailment problem, where the consistency of the generated answer with the
context is evaluated to estimate confidence levels [Poliak, 2020, Dagan et al., 2022]. For example, an
answer discussing "apples" in a context focused on "tea" would be flagged as highly inconsistent.
Second, we introduce a Partially Observable MDP (POMDP) based router [Åström, 1965]. POMDPs
extend standard MDPs to decision problems where observations (self-verification probabilities) are
unreliable and provide a noisy estimate of states (question difficulty). Modeling the router as a
POMDP agent ensures all our requirements are met, as the POMDP can implicitly model various
difficulties and assess them based on noisy self-verification outputs. Furthermore, POMDPs provide
a principled formulation to learn robust routing policies in different scenarios with varying numbers
of models, different costs, and capabilities, while learning from as few as 50 examples.
We conduct extensive evaluations of AutoMix on five different dialogue and context-grounded
reasoning tasks, with five different models. Our results demonstrate that AutoMix consistently
outperforms baselines while reducing cost by over two times while achieving the same performance,
showcasing significant improvements and efficiency gains over existing model-switching strategies.
2
Background and Related Work
Self-Verification The concept of self-verification in reasoning problems has been explored in various
works, such as Weng et al. [2023], Jiang et al. [2023b], Pan et al. [2023a]. These approaches typically
2

Context: {context}
Question: {question}
AI Generated Answer: {generated_answer}
Instruction: Your task is to evaluate if the AI Generated Answer is correct, based on the
provided context and question. Provide the judgement and reasoning for each case. Choose
between Correct or Incorrect.
,→
,→
Evaluation:"
Listing 1: Verification Prompt. The verification process is framed as a natural language entailment
task, where the model determines the validity of the model-generated answer with respect to the
context and question. We use a generic few-shot prompt for all tasks.
rely on the LLM’s knowledge [Dhuliawala et al., 2023], a method that can pose challenges for
reasoning problems [Madaan et al., 2023, Huang et al., 2023b]. In contrast, AutoMix leverages
context for verification and introduces a POMDP router to mitigate potential noise from the verifier.
Another line of work collects a corpus of past mistakes made by models [Madaan et al., 2022], and
external knowledge bases for verification [Peng et al., 2023, Gao et al., 2023, Pan et al., 2023b].
In contrast, AutoMix uses the question’s context to verify the answer. While previous works find
self-verification is unreliable to repair the model’s output [Huang et al., 2023a], we demonstrate that
self-verification provides a valuable signal used for routing to an appropriate model.
Mixing Models Several works have sought to optimize LLM inference cost through model switching,
employing specifically trained verifiers [Chen et al., 2023, Zhu et al., 2023, vSakota et al., 2023, Ding
et al., 2024]. AutoMix eliminates the need for expensive verifier training through few-shot SLM
model prompting and does not require upfront access to all input queries. The router, trained with as
few as 50 samples, outperforms specialized models. Our work is thus aligned with recent work that
aims at composing different models and external tools for inference time improvement of language
models [Khattab et al., 2023, Press et al., 2022, Yao et al., 2022, Zhou et al., 2022].
Adaptive Computation Adaptive computation and model routing methods often preempt computa-
tion via intermediate representations [Liu et al., 2020, Zhou et al., 2020, Geng et al., 2021, Schuster
et al., 2022, Madaan and Yang, 2022]. Unlike these methods, AutoMix requires no architectural
changes and assumes only black-box access to APIs. While some black-box methods like Adaptive-
Consistency [Aggarwal et al., 2023] aim to optimize inference for reasoning tasks, they are limited to
a single LLM model, whereas AutoMix flexibly optimizes between two or more models.
Background on Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes POMDPs extend Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) to scenarios where an agent’s state observation is partial or noisy. Defined
as a tuple ⟨S, A, T, R, Ω, O⟩, S denotes states, A actions, and Ωpossible observations. The transition
function T gives transition probabilities between states given an action, while the observation function
P connects actions and states to observations. The reward function R assigns rewards to actions
in specific states. Agents in POMDPs maintain a belief (b), a probability distribution over states.
This belief updates based on actions and observations. The objective in a POMDP is to find a policy
π : b 7→a ∈A that maximizes the expected cumulative long-term reward. POMDPs have been
used in various domains, including robotics, automated navigation, crowdsourcing workflows, and
strategic planning [Kaelbling et al., 1998, Schwarting et al., 2018, Dai et al., 2010, Meuleau et al.,
2013]. However, AutoMix uses POMDPs in a novel way to route queries between LMs. Our noisy
self-verification outputs act as observations to the POMDP, which assesses question difficulty and
routes to the appropriate LM to maximize a reward function of cost and performance.
3
Problem Formulation
We address the problem of selecting the appropriate language model (LM) to maximize a user-defined
cost-quality tradeoff. We assume access to N distinct language models: LM1, LM2 . . . LMN,
numbered in increasing order of number of parameters. Each model has an associated cost of Ci
and (unknown) performance of Pi for each input query. Our objective is to maximize the total
performance for any total cost while dynamically invoking any LM as appropriate for a given test
3

Context
Which country grows the most tea? The answer is India. It grows three times as much as China. Which
country drinks the most tea? It’s neither China nor Japan. It’s Great Britain. [...] One customer put the
bag into a pot. Then he just poured hot water over it. And the tea bag was born. Shen Nong was the
first to drink tea. (Shen was a Chinese emperor.) This was about 2737 B.C. Shen had bad digestion.
So he drank several cups of hot water daily[...] Tea became the drink of China.
Question
When did Shen Nong drink tea?
Generated Answer (by LLAMA2-13B)
He took it in 1990.
Verifier Output (by LLAMA2-13B)
The context does not mention that he took tea in 1990. The AI-generated answer is Incorrect.
Figure 2: Context-Grounded Self-Verification using LLAMA2-13B in Action. The example
showcases the verifier, utilizing the same model as the answer generator, identifying and rejecting an
inaccurate answer—He took it in 1990—by effectively leveraging the context.
point. In experiments, we compare cost-quality curves of various methods and also evaluate them
using a newly proposed IBC metric (See Section 5.1).
To test our approach, we consider context-grounded reasoning tasks, such as comprehension-based
QA and a variety of dialogue reasoning tasks, where given a context C (e.g., stories, newswire,
or dialogue history) and a question q, the model must generate an accurate and coherent answer
consistent with the provided context. Our choice of tasks is motivated by two key considerations:
(1) longer queries are more computationally demanding, underscoring the need for an approach
like AutoMix to navigate the cost-accuracy tradeoff, and (2) the context allows for cross-checking
preliminary answers with available information using self-verification (described shortly). We assume
only black-box access is available to the LM APIs. For training any router models, we assume access
to a small training/validation dataset Dtrain consisting of < C, q, ˆy, yLMi > triplets, where ˆy is the
ground truth answer and yLMi is the answer generated by LMi.
4
AutoMix
At a high level, AutoMix consists of three steps: solution generation – using a small LM, say LMi
(initially i = 1), to generate an answer As; self-verification – using the same LMi to assess As;
and selective routing – picking a larger LM, LMj(j > i), when suggested by self-verification, else
returning As as final answer. Figure 1 shows a representative example of the process for the two-LM
case. Next, we discuss our two technical contributions in detail.
4.1
Self-Verification
To assess the trustworthiness of As, AutoMix employs a few-shot verifier, V, which validates LMi’s
output. Unlike existing works that perform verification by creating a new question [Weng et al., 2022,
Jiang et al., 2023b], we frame verification as an entailment task [Dagan et al., 2005, Poliak, 2020,
Dagan et al., 2022], to determine whether the answer generated by LMi aligns with the provided
context. Specifically, the verifier gauges v = p(correct = 1 | As, C, q), with correct = 1 indicating
that As is correct. To estimate the probability, we sample k > 1 times from the verifier (LMi) with
high sampling temperature, and probability is then computed as 1
k
Pk
i=1 1{correct = 1}. We use the
same 4-shot verification prompt for all tasks and do not train a verifier. Figure 1, 2 shows the prompt
and an example of self-verification in action. We refer readers to Appendix B for all prompts used.
4

4.2
Router
Routing follows solution generation and self-verification. The router decides whether the output from
LMi should be accepted or the query be routed to some LMj (j > i) for improved performance. The
router can also be interpreted as a meta-verifier, providing an extra layer of confidence assessment on
the few-shot verifier’s evaluations. Specifically, V ascertains whether LMi’s answer is entailed by the
context, making its decision without considering the inherent difficulty of the problem. For example,
when handling Unsolvable queries, invoking a larger LM will be resource-inefficient and would not
enhance performance. A good router can address this by not routing such a query further, and this
decision needs to be made using the verification probability and trends from the training data.
Addressing the notable challenges of self-correction in large language models [Madaan et al., 2023,
Huang et al., 2023b], AutoMix employs a non-LLM setup for routing and avoids escalating issues
such as hallucination and reasoning errors [Dziri et al., 2023]. The router can, in principle, adopt
various learning strategies, including supervised learning, reinforcement learning, and symbolic
reasoning. Subsequent sections provide details of two different routing strategies in AutoMix.
Thresholding
In this simplistic routing approach for the two-model case (N = 2), the decision to
route to LM2 is based on the probability v of the LM1 verifier and a threshold t. If v ≥t, it returns
LM1’s answer, else routes the query to LM2. Intuitively, a high probability indicates the verifier is
confident in its decision and can be trusted. Varying t can help explore cost-performance tradeoffs.
POMDP-based Router
A router should direct a query to larger LMs only when the performance
gap justifies the cost-quality tradeoff. Given the inherent uncertainty in the true state of system
performance, which remains unobserved, we formulate the router as a Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (POMDP) [Åström, 1965]. POMDPs are particularly well-suited for scenarios
where observations, such as self-verification probabilities, may not be entirely reliable.
Recall that (Section 2) a POMDP is characterized by (S, A, T, R, Ω, O). In our application, the states
S represent the current selected LMi and performance metrics (e.g., accuracy or F-score) of various
LMs on a data point, denoted as S = ⟨i, PerfLM1, PerfLM2, . . . , PerfLMN ⟩. The actions include
either retaining the current LM’s (LMi) answer or routing to one of the larger LMs. Observations
Ω, in the form of the verifier, outputs v from LMi, enabling the POMDP to ascertain its belief
state b: a probability distribution over S. The observation probabilities P(o|s), which indicate the
likelihood of observing o (verification output) given state s, are crucial for defining the POMDP
model. E.g., high verifier confidence might suggest that the current LM’s performance PerfLMi is
high enough, reducing the necessity to switch to a more costly LM. The observation probabilities
are estimated directly on the train set, by computing the expectation of verification probabilities for
each state, i.e P(o|s) =
P
sj ,vj ∈Dtrain 1{sj=s and vj=o}
P
sj ∈Dtrain 1{sj=s}
. However, since the states can be continuous,
we use non-parametric Gaussian kernel density estimation to estimate the observation probability
for a new state. Instead of directly estimating P(o|s), we first learn a joint distribution P(S, O) and
P(S), by drawing KDE at each training point. Then conditional probability P(o|s) is computed as:
P(o|s) = P (s,o)
P (s) .
The objective of our POMDP is to optimize a reward function R = P −λ · C, where P is overall
performance, C is overall cost, λ is a tuning parameter that balances two criteria, according to
user preferences. We utilize the AdaOps POMDP solver [Wu et al., 2021], which employs particle
filtering for representing belief, where each particle corresponds to a particular state. At inference,
the POMDP solver starts with an initial belief (uniform distribution), updates its belief state based
on verifier observations, and, based on the updated belief state b′, takes an action to maximize the
expected reward. We provide further details and the complete POMDP formulation in Appendix A.3.
5
Experiments
Through our experiments, we wish to answer the following research questions. How does AutoMix
compare with other model-switching strategies? How well does AutoMix perform when varying
(1) cost ratios between models, and (2) the amount of available training data? Following recent
work [Ding et al., 2024], we perform most experiments in the setting when N = 2, but also report
5

procedure ANSWERQUERY(C, q)
▷C: Context, q: Question, SLM/LLM:
Small/large language model
As ←SOLVE(SLM, C, q)
v ←SELF-VERIFY(As, C, q)
if META-VERIFY(v, As, C, q) then
return As
else
Al ←SOLVE(LLM, C, q)
return Al
end if
end procedure
0
20
40
60
50
55
60
65
70
Cost
Performance
SLM
LLM
Figure 3: Left: AutoMix algorithm. Right: Performance vs. Cost curve. The slope between SLM
and LLM provides a way to the Incremental Benefit per Cost (IBC) for methods that mix models.
Methods with a steeper slope than this reference when plotted against SLM have a positive IBC
(green region), whereas those below the reference have a negative IBC (red region).
additional results in the three model cases (in Section 5.5). For N = 2, we use the terms SLM and
LLM to denote small (LM1) and large (LM2) language models, respectively.
5.1
A Metric for Cost-Performance Efficiency Analysis
Incremental Benefit Per Cost (IBC)
In our approach to leveraging model performance, it is
essential to consider not only the raw accuracy of predictions but also the associated computational
or monetary costs. To that end, we introduce a metric to understand the performance of the models
in terms of cost. We introduce methods, denoted by M, to optimally integrate SLM and LLM. For
each method M, we associate a cost CM and performance PM. To quantify the utility of M over
SLM, we define the metric Incremental Benefit Per Cost (IBC) as IBCM (Equation (1)).
IBCM = PM −PSLM
CM −CSLM
,
IBCBASE
= PLLM −PSLM
CLLM −CSLM
,
∆IBC(M) =
IBCM −IBCBASE
IBCBASE
× 100
(1)
The IBC metric captures the efficiency of performance enhancement relative to the additional cost.
For comparative evaluation, we set a baseline IBC, IBCBASE, representing the benefit of always using
LLM over SLM. Finally, we compare methods using ∆IBC, which compares the IBC of a specific
method with IBCBASE. A positive IBC lift suggests that M achieves performance increments more
cost-effectively than a standalone LLM, whereas a negative lift indicates reduced efficiency (Figure 3)
Geometric Interpretation
On a Performance vs. Cost plot, consider the line segment joining
the data points of the small language model (SLM) and the large language model (LLM). This
segment’s slope represents the rate of performance increase per unit of cost. The Incremental
Benefit per Cost (IBC) for any method M is the slope of the line from the SLM point to the point
representing M(Figure 3). A method M that lies above the SLM-LLM segment provides a steeper
slope, indicating a favorable IBC (and a positive ∆IBC). Conversely, if M lies below the segment, it
suggests an unfavorable or negative IBC. Our primary objective is to develop methods that yield a
consistently positive IBC, maximizing performance enhancements for each additional unit of cost.
5.2
Setup
Models and Cost Calculation
We use GPT-3.5, LLAMA2-13B, and MISTRAL-7B (instruct v0.2
version) [Touvron et al., 2023, Jiang et al., 2023a] as the smaller language models (SLMs), and
GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023] as the larger language model (LLM). For each input query, we model fixed
costs for the models and verification, denoted by CSLM for smaller models, CLLM for the larger
model, and Cver for the verification model. As the verification is performed by CSLM and the major
cost driver is the question context, which remains the same in both models, we set Cver = CSLM. At
6

0
50
100
150
200
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.8
DIPLOMAT
0
50
100
150
200
0.55
0.65
0.75
0.85
0.95
MUTUAL
0
50
100
150
200
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
QUALITY
0
50
100
150
200
0.25
0.35
0.45
0.55
0.65
COQA
0
50
100
150
200
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
QASPER
AutoMix +POMDP
AutoMix +Threshold
FrugalGPT [Chen et al., 2023]
HybridLLM [Ding et al., 2024]
LLAMA2-13B (SLM)
GPT-4 (LLM)
Random Mixing
Figure 4: Main Results: performance (y-axis) vs. cost (x-axis) for different methods on the small and
large MISTRAL-7B/GPT-4. POMDP based meta-verifier is consistently above the linear interpolation
(random mixing) of SLM-LLM, signifying a higher incremental benefit per unit cost (IBC).
inference, the total cost is computed as the sum of individual costs, C = CSLM + Cver + w · CLLM,
where w indicates whether the larger model is invoked.
While the pricing of these APIs [Dehghani et al., 2021] is influenced by various complexities, our
focus on the black-box utilization of language models leads us to represent cost based on the actual
API price disparity between these models.2 For each of GPT-3.5, LLAMA2-13B, MISTRAL-7B, we
assign a relative cost of 1 unit for the SLM and 60, 100, 200 units for the LLM respectively. It’s
important to note that the cost ratio between models can vary significantly depending on specific
deployment scenarios. For example, for a user with access to a single A6000 GPU, running LLAMA2-
13B might incur virtually no cost, while utilizing GPT-4 could be prohibitively expensive. We simulate
this scenario in Section 5.4. We refer readers to Appendix B for additional details.
Datasets
We experiment with a diverse set of datasets: i) QASPER [Dasigi et al., 2021]: Question
answering over research papers; ii) QUALITY [Pang et al., 2022]: Multiple-choice questions (MCQ)
on long articles and stories; iii) COQA [Reddy et al., 2019]: Conversational comprehension requiring
coreference and pragmatic reasoning; iv) MUTUAL [Cui et al., 2020]: Multi-turn dialogue reasoning
(next response prediction); v) DIPLOMAT [Li et al., 2023]: Pragmatic identification and reasoning
questions on multi-turn dialogues. We use the F1 score for QASPER and COQA, and accuracy for
the remaining datasets. We use the default validation splits and utilize prompts from Shaham et al.
[2023] for QASPER and QUALITY, and adapt the QUALITY prompt for other datasets. We use identical
prompts for all models. We refer readers to Appendix B for more details.
Baselines
We compare against FrugalGPT [Chen et al., 2023] and HybridLLM [Ding et al.,
2024], two state-of-the-art models, as our baselines. FrugalGPT uses a finetuned DistillBert
model [Sanh et al., 2019] as a router. If the router’s confidence for a given question, context, and
SLM answer falls below a threshold, the query is routed to the LLM. HybridLLM uses trained
DeBERTa [He et al., 2021] as a router which directly chooses between SLM and LLM without
2https://openai.com/pricing, https://together.ai/
7

Model
Method
DIPLOMAT
MUTUAL
COQA
QASPER
QUALITY
MISTRAL-7B
FrugalGPT
16.8
20.3
-16.7
7.7
8.1
HybridLLM
67.1
3.4
10.5
0.4
2.7
AutoMix + T
149.7
46.7
12.1
67.9
33.6
AutoMix + P
156.8
46.7
12.4
69.3
51.6
LLAMA2-13B
FrugalGPT
-7.0
-8.7
2.6
9.4
-4.7
HybridLLM
3.8
2.2
-0.5
7.2
6.5
AutoMix + T
50.1
11.8
86.5
-0.2
9.4
AutoMix + P
58.5
12.4
83.1
8.5
10.3
GPT-3.5
FrugalGPT
30.1
11.1
37.0
87.2
10.1
HybridLLM
8.3
1.8
20.1
21.7
11.8
AutoMix + T
168.2
18.3
62.7
109.8
23.5
AutoMix + P
151.2
18.8
65.0
114.7
24.1
Table 1: ∆IBC values: AutoMix + T and AutoMix + P are variations of our proposed method with
thresholding (T) and POMDP-based routers, respectively. Best numbers are bold, and second-best
are underlined. AutoMix + POMDP demonstrates robust and consistent ∆IBC across all datasets,
implying judicious utilization of computational resources. Despite domain-specific training and a
0-cost verifier, FrugalGPT and HybridLLM underperform AutoMix in almost all scenarios.
generating an SLM response. Further, training labels for HybridLLM’s router are generated based
on the probability of SLM outperforming LLM by a margin, computed by drawing multiple samples.
Note, that training each of these baselines along with AutoMix requires running inference on all
models, however, it is only a training time cost. However, at inference, unlike AutoMix we assign a
cost of 0 to the two baselines’ routers due to their lower operational costs.
5.3
Main Results
Figure 4 illustrates the performance versus cost curves for various datasets and model-mixing
methods using MISTRAL-7B as SLM. Across all datasets, AutoMix-POMDP and AutoMix-
Threshold consistently outperform FrugalGPT and HybridLLM, staying above the SLM-LLM
curve and yielding better performance per unit cost. This is particularly notable as both FrugalGPT
and HybridLLM leverage domain-specific trained routers and do not incur any verification costs.
Comparable trends are observed with other SLMs LLAMA2-13B and GPT-3.5 in Figure 18, 19.
Table 1 presents a comparison of the average ∆IBC across five equally sized cost regions for
each method, dataset, and three different SLMs. AutoMix-POMDP consistently outperforms
FrugalGPT and HybridLLM across all datasets and models, with performance equalling
FrugalGPT in the qasper dataset for the LLAMA2-13B model. The gains vary across differ-
ent settings, with the best performance observed on the DIPLOMAT dataset, averaging 122% across
all models. Importantly, AutoMix-POMDP is the only method that yields positive gains across all
configurations and consistently matches or exceeds the performance of AutoMix-Threshold. This is
despite being tested on a variety of datasets and models representing different costs, task difficulty
(accuracy ranging from 30% to 90%), performance gap between the models (8% to ≈50%), different
answer types (MCQ, Open-ended). The results demonstrate that AutoMix, utilizing self-verification
and appropriate routing, can effectively mix different SLMs and GPT-4 on a wide range of tasks
without access to model weights or domain-specific routing data. These substantial gains translate
directly into cost savings, underscoring the economic relevance of our approach.
5.4
Additional Experiments
Effect of Cost Ratio on AutoMix
Our main experiments assumed different cost ratio ranging from
1:60 to 1:200 for different SLMs. Subsequently, we conduct an analysis to understand how alterations
in the cost ratio influence the ∆IBC values across different cost ratios. In Figure 5 (right), we vary
cost-ratio and report ∆IBC normalized by the maximum value obtained on the dataset (a higher value
denotes higher gains). The results suggest that even for a cost ratio as low as 1:10, AutoMix begins
to deliver good gains for many datasets, which naturally improve as cost-ratio gets further skewed.
8

50 100
250
500
1000
Train Size
10
0
10
20
30
Macro Averaged IBC Lift
Automix w/ POMDP
Frugal
HybridLLM
10
1
10
2
10
3
Cost Ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized IBC Lift
DiPlomat
MuTual
CoQA
QASPER
Quality
Figure 5: Left: Comparison of AutoMix with FrugalGPT and HybridLLM over varying training
data sizes shows that despite 0-cost verifier and domain-specific training, baselines underperform
AutoMix. AutoMix excels in limited data settings. Right: Normalized ∆IBC across different cost
ratios. AutoMix show robust performance gains even when cost ratio is low.
We supplement the analysis with cost-performance curves for different cost ratios in Appendix D.2.
We note that cost need not only be monetary cost, and could, in general, represent other considerations
such as latency or energy usage. These results demonstrate that AutoMix provides a novel method to
balance the cost-performance tradeoff across a wide range of cost scenarios and is robust to changes
without any modifications to the method.
AutoMix is Effective in Low-Resource Scenarios
Figure 5 (left) demonstrates the performance
dynamics of AutoMix, FrugalGPT and HybridLLM with varying validation set size. Notably,
our method significantly outperforms FrugalGPT and HybridLLM with limited data, despite
the latter’s domain-specific training and zero verifier cost. E.g., with just 50 training examples,
AutoMix maintains 15% ∆IBC and beats the baselines by more than absolute 20%. This underscores
that AutoMix is particularly advantageous in the real-world scenarios where training data is scarce.
When Does POMDP Routing Help?
POMDP implicitly categorizes question difficulty into three
types: (a) easy queries solvable by the small model, (b) complex queries only larger models can
solve, and (c) potentially unsolvable queries for any model. It leverages self-verification probabili-
ties—which provide a noisy estimate of difficulty—to make non-linear decisions. For example, in
the QASPER dataset using MISTRAL-7B as SLM, POMDP identifies that lower confidence values
correspond to such cases, and instead of routing to the LLM as other methods do, returns the SLM
answer, saving cost. Furthermore, in setups with more than two models (as discussed in Section 5.5),
POMDP makes more nuanced decisions, for instance by combining information from small and
medium-sized verifiers, resulting in significantly superior performance.
Other Experiments
We perform various other experiments, whose details are in appendix due
to space limitations. We first evaluate few-shot self-verification quantitatively and qualitatively and
observe that the self-verification can effectively use context to identify errors in answers generated by
SLM in many cases (see Appendix A).
While AutoMix is outperforms on diverse set of datasets, to further demonstrate our router’s
generalizability, we evaluate out-of-domain generalization by training on one dataset and evaluat-
ing on held-out datasets. Results in Appendix D.3 show that AutoMix consistently outperforms
FrugalGPT and HybridLLM by significant margins. Overall, the task-agnostic design of POMDP
and these results highlight our method’s generalizability.
We also study the latency overhead of AutoMix. At inference time, POMDP takes less than 1ms
for every query in the two-model setup. Moreover, network latency (usually approximately 10ms) is
much less than the average solution generation time by SLM and LLM (on the order of seconds).
Thus, AutoMix adds no additional computational or latency overhead compared to language model
inference. Finally, incorporating the POMDP router for end-users is convenient, as our library can be
incorporated in less than five lines of code.
9

5.5
Results of Automix with Three Models
0
20
40
60
80
100
Computational Cost
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
Performance (F1 Score)
GPT-4
LLaMA-13B
LLaMA-70B
Methods
Automix3
Chained Automix
Union Automix
Frugal
LLaMA-13B
LLaMA-70B
GPT-4
IBC13B/70B
IBC70B/GPT4
Figure 6: AutoMix with 3 models: LLAMA2-
13B, GPT-4 and GPT-4.
AutoMix method
shows consistent IBC lifts for both SLM-MLM
and MLM-LLM regions. Further, compared to
baselines: FrugalGPT, chaining two AutoMix
models or using the union of two AutoMixes,
AutoMix3 provide significant improvements.
We evaluate the performance of AutoMix ap-
plied to a three-model scenario (N = 3). Specif-
ically, we use LLAMA2-13B as SLM, LLAMA2-
70B as MLM, and GPT-4 as LLM. Results
are presented in Figure 6. AutoMix consis-
tently outperforms baselines across cost regions.
We first compare AutoMix to FrugalGPT,
showing significant improvements across all
cost regions considered.
We also compare
AutoMix to a baseline, Union AutoMix,
which selects between AutoMixSLM−MLM
and AutoMixMLM−LLM based on the user’s
cost requirements.
For instance, if the de-
sired average cost is less than that of the
MLM, AutoMixSLM−MLM
is employed;
otherwise, AutoMixMLM−LLM is utilized.
Further, we consider a baseline, Chained
AutoMix, by chaining AutoMixSLM−MLM
with AutoMixMLM−LLM.
The query first
goes to the SLM, and an AutoMixSLM−MLM
decides between reporting the SLM answer or
routing to the MLM. In the latter case, a second
AutoMixMLM−LLM repeats the procedure using the MLM and LLM models. Chained AutoMix
underperforms across the board, as it cannot directly route queries from the SLM to the LLM.
Additionally, whenever Chained AutoMix prompts the MLM, it invariably uses the costly verifier,
even when it might not be necessary. Further, in Figure 9, 10, we study two additional cases: 1.)
If the MLM underperforms the SLM, and its verifier is uninformative, then unlike FrugalGPT,
AutoMix learns the irrelevance of MLM and routes directly from SLM to LLM as needed; 2.)
In scenarios where MLM underperforms the SLM, but its verifier provides useful information,
AutoMix leverages information from MLM’s verifier to outperform all baselines considered. The
experiments show the efficacy of AutoMix in providing optimum performance across diverse
situations without additional intervention. We refer readers to Appendix C for more details.
6
Conclusion
AutoMix integrates multiple black-box LLM APIs into a multi-step problem-solving framework,
optimizing the computational cost and performance trade-offs. Our work interweaves Good Old-
Fashioned Artificial Intelligence (GOFAI) approaches with LLMs, demonstrating that the incorpora-
tion of a POMDP can lead to effective routing between LLMs. Our work provides a novel method
to balance cost-performance tradeoffs across a wide variety of models over different desired cost
ranges, consistently outperforming the baselines by significant margins. AutoMix opens avenues
for several interesting research directions. While self-verification and correction are challenging for
LLMs in general, we find promising results using context-grounded few-shot verification coupled
with POMDPs, indicating that similar approaches may also help other scenarios. The work may be
extended to generation tasks, where the notion of performance is subjective.
Limitations
While our empirical evidence across various models and datasets demonstrates the effectiveness of
AutoMix, its broader applicability might vary depending on the specific models and datasets used.
Furthermore, AutoMix is designed with a dialogue-related or context-grounded reasoning setup in
mind for effective self-verification, which does not include tasks like factual question-answering and
commonsense reasoning. In the future, as open-source models become more powerful and inference
costs decrease, it might be feasible to serve a strong model for all queries. However, there are likely
to still be availability trade-offs that could be managed using AutoMix.
10

7
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the IBM AI Horizons Network grant, grants by Google, and Microsoft,
an IBM SUR award, and the Jai Gupta chair fellowship by IIT Delhi. We thank the IIT Delhi HPC
facility for its computational resources. We are grateful to Microsoft AFMR for supporting this work.
We also thank Kalpesh Krishna, Prakhar Gupta, Rahul Gupta, Siddharth Gopal, and Yang Song for
their valuable feedback.
References
Pranjal Aggarwal, Aman Madaan, Yiming Yang, and Mausam.
Let’s sample step by step:
Adaptive-consistency for efficient reasoning and coding with LLMs. In Houda Bouamor, Juan
Pino, and Kalika Bali, editors, Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 12375–12396, Singapore, December 2023. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.761. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.761.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei A. Zaharia, and James Y. Zou. Frugalgpt: How to use large language models
while reducing cost and improving performance. ArXiv, abs/2305.05176, 2023. URL https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258564349.
Leyang Cui, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Yue Zhang, and Ming Zhou. Mutual: A dataset for multi-turn
dialogue reasoning. ArXiv, abs/2004.04494, 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:215548215.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine learning challenges workshop, pages 177–190. Springer, 2005.
Ido Dagan, Dan Roth, Fabio Zanzotto, and Mark Sammons. Recognizing textual entailment: Models
and applications. Springer Nature, 2022.
Peng Dai, Mausam, and Daniel S. Weld. Decision-theoretic control of crowd-sourced workflows.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2010. URL https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8730278.
Pradeep Dasigi, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Arman Cohan, Noah A Smith, and Matt Gardner. A dataset of
information-seeking questions and answers anchored in research papers. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, pages 4599–4610, 2021.
Mostafa Dehghani, Yi Tay, Anurag Arnab, Lucas Beyer, and Ashish Vaswani. The efficiency
misnomer. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz,
and Jason Weston. Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.11495, 2023.
Dujian Ding, Ankur Mallick, Chi Wang, Robert Sim, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Victor Rühle, Laks
V. S. Lakshmanan, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah. Hybrid LLM: Cost-efficient and quality-aware
query routing. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=02f3mUtqnM.
Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jian, Bill Yuchen Lin, Peter West,
Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jena D Hwang, et al. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers
on compositionality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18654, 2023.
Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan,
Vincent Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, et al. Rarr: Researching and revising what
language models say, using language models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 16477–16508, 2023.
11

Shijie Geng, Peng Gao, Zuohui Fu, and Yongfeng Zhang. Romebert: Robust training of multi-exit
bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09755, 2021.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
with disentangled attention, 2021.
Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song,
and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. ArXiv, abs/2310.01798,
2023a. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263609132.
Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song,
and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01798, 2023b.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas
Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023a.
Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Longhui Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang, Zhenguo Li, and James T Kwok.
Backward reasoning in large language models for verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07758,
2023b.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in
partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial Intelligence, 101(1):99–134, 1998. ISSN
0004-3702.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(98)00023-X.
URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S000437029800023X.
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-
hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T Joshi, Hanna Moazam, et al. Dspy: Compiling
declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714,
2023.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, 2023.
Hengli Li, Songchun Zhu, and Zilong Zheng. Diplomat: A dialogue dataset for situated pragmatic
reasoning. ArXiv, abs/2306.09030, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:259164643.
Weijie Liu, Peng Zhou, Zhiruo Wang, Zhe Zhao, Haotang Deng, and Qi Ju. Fastbert: a self-distilling
bert with adaptive inference time. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 6035–6044, 2020.
Aman Madaan and Yiming Yang.
Flowgen: Fast and slow graph generation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.07656, 2022.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Peter Clark, and Yiming Yang. Memory-assisted prompt editing to
improve GPT-3 after deployment. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 2833–2861, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/
2022.emnlp-main.183.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651, 2023.
Nicolas Meuleau, Leonid Peshkin, Kee-Eung Kim, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning finite-state
controllers for partially observable environments, 2013.
12

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
Liangming Pan, Michael Saxon, Wenda Xu, Deepak Nathani, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang.
Automatically correcting large language models: Surveying the landscape of diverse self-correction
strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03188, 2023a.
Liangming Pan, Xiaobao Wu, Xinyuan Lu, Anh Tuan Luu, William Yang Wang, Min-Yen Kan, and
Preslav Nakov. Fact-checking complex claims with program-guided reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.12744, 2023b.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Alicia Parrish, Nitish Joshi, Nikita Nangia, Jason Phang, Angelica Chen,
Vishakh Padmakumar, Johnny Ma, Jana Thompson, He He, et al. Quality: Question answering with
long input texts, yes! In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 5336–5358,
2022.
Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Hao Cheng, Yujia Xie, Yu Hu, Qiuyuan Huang, Lars
Liden, Zhou Yu, Weizhu Chen, et al. Check your facts and try again: Improving large language
models with external knowledge and automated feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12813, 2023.
Adam Poliak. A survey on recognizing textual entailment as an nlp evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.03061, 2020.
Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350,
2022.
Guillem Ramírez, Alexandra Birch, and Ivan Titov. Optimising calls to large language models with
uncertainty-based two-tier selection, 2024.
Siva Reddy, Danqi Chen, and Christopher D Manning. Coqa: A conversational question answering
challenge. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:249–266, 2019.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.
10084.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Jai Gupta, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Vinh Q Tran, Yi Tay, and
Donald Metzler. Confident adaptive language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07061, 2022.
Wilko Schwarting, Javier Alonso-Mora, and Daniela Rus.
Planning and decision-making for
autonomous vehicles.
Annu. Rev. Control. Robotics Auton. Syst., 1:187–210, 2018.
URL
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:64853900.
Uri Shaham, Elad Segal, Maor Ivgi, Avia Efrat, Ori Yoran, Adi Haviv, Ankit Gupta, Wenhan Xiong,
Mor Geva, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. SCROLLS: Standardized CompaRison over long
language sequences. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 12007–12021, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
emnlp-main.823.
Uri Shaham, Maor Ivgi, Avia Efrat, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Zeroscrolls: A zero-shot
benchmark for long text understanding, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
13

Gladys Tyen, Hassan Mansoor, Peter Chen, Tony Mak, and Victor C˘arbune. Llms cannot find
reasoning errors, but can correct them! arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08516, 2023.
Marija vSakota, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West.
Fly-swat or cannon? cost-effective lan-
guage model choice via meta-modeling. ArXiv, abs/2308.06077, 2023. URL https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:260866096.
Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Large language models are reasoners
with self-verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09561, 2022.
Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Large language
models are better reasoners with self-verification. CoRR, abs/2212.09561, 2023.
Chenyang Wu, Guoyu Yang, Zongzhang Zhang, Yang Yu, Dong Li, Wulong Liu, and Jianye HAO.
Adaptive online packing-guided search for POMDPs. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang,
and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0zvTBoQb5PA.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Frank F Xu, Zhengbao Jiang, and Graham Neubig. Docprompting: Gen-
erating code by retrieving the docs. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2022.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Canwen Xu, Tao Ge, Julian McAuley, Ke Xu, and Furu Wei. Bert loses patience:
Fast and robust inference with early exit. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
18330–18341, 2020.
Banghua Zhu, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Clark W. Barrett, Michael I. Jordan, and Jiantao Jiao.
On optimal caching and model multiplexing for large model inference. ArXiv, abs/2306.02003,
2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259075212.
K.J Åström. Optimal control of markov processes with incomplete state information. Journal of
Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 10(1):174–205, 1965. ISSN 0022-247X. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0022-247X(65)90154-X. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0022247X6590154X.
14

A
How effective is few-shot self-verification?
A.1
Quantitative Analysis
One notable contribution of this work is the concept of few-shot self-verification of outputs. Self-
Verification, especially for reasoning problems, poses its own set of challenges; however, our setup
has a unique advantage: the capacity to utilize context to validate answers. For instance, the model
can identify factual inaccuracies in the answer or discern apparent contradictions that might not
have been evident during the initial response. But does this advantage translate to effective self-
verification in practice? As depicted in Figure 12, for all but once few-shot self-verification succeeds
in accurately identifying correct examples by assigning them higher probabilities across all other
datasets. Specifically, the y-axis on the graph denotes the precision of identifying the correct responses
(defined as F1 > 0.1). For all but QUALITY and QASPER higher verification probability, always higher
precision. Even for QASPER, barring 2/9 outliers, the trend generally holds.
A.2
Qualitative Analysis
Representative Examples from our qualitative analysis are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.
Attribute
Content
Context
Which country grows the most tea? ... Shen sipped it. He liked it. He drank
it all. Shen was proud of his new drink. Truncated for brevity
Question
When did he take it?
Generated
An-
swer
He took it in 1990.
Gold Answer
about 2737 B.C
Verifier Output
The context does not mention that he took tea in 1990. Verification Decision:
The AI generated answer is Incorrect.
Table 2: An example where the generated answer is verifiably incorrect, citing an unsupported date
(1990), and the verifier successfully catches this discrepancy.
Attribute
Content
Context
Fort Lauderdale, Florida (CNN) – Just taking a sip of water or walking to the
bathroom is excruciatingly painful for 15-year-old Michael Brewer, ... He
suffered second- and third-degree burns over about two-thirds of his body,
according to the hospital’s associate director, Dr. Carl Schulman. Truncated
for brevity
Question
How long before he recovers from his injury?
Generated
An-
swer
he will never recover from his injury.
Gold Answer
He has a lifelong recovery.
Verifier Output
The context clearly states that the teen is recovering from his injuries. Verifi-
cation Decision: The AI generated answer is Incorrect.
Table 3: The example demonstrates a challenging case for the verifier. The generated answer is a
rephrasing of what’s mentioned in the context, however the verifier fails to catch it.
FrugalGPT vs. AutoMix at different levels of data availability
Figure 7 demonstrates the
performance dynamics of AutoMix and FrugalGPT with varying validation data sizes. Notably,
our method significantly outperforms FrugalGPT with limited data, despite the latter’s domain-
specific training and zero verifier cost. However, as training data increases, FrugalGPT narrows the
15

Attribute
Content
Context
Pruning keeps the plant only three or four feet tall. This is an easy height for
tea picking. Green tea is steamed right after the leaves are picked. Green tea
_ its healthy qualities. For example, it may prevent heart disease. How did
we get tea bag? The answer: by accident. Truncated
Question
What did they do to green tea after picking it?
SLM Answer
steamed.
Gold Answer
prune it
Verifier Output
The context mentions that green tea is steamed after being picked. Verification
Decision: The AI generated answer is Correct.
Table 4: An instance where the verifier deems the answer correct, and the gold label was incorrect.
The verifier is able to correctly infer that the context mentions tea being steamed after picking.
performance gap by leveraging its domain-specific training. This pattern indicates that AutoMix
provides a particularly advantageous solution in real-world scenarios where data may be scarce.
50 100
250
500
1000
Train Size
10
0
10
20
30
Macro Averaged IBC Lift
Automix w/ POMDP
Frugal
HybridLLM
Figure 7: Comparison of AutoMix with FrugalGPT over varying Training Dataset Size. Despite
zero-cost verifier and domain-specific training, FrugalGPT underperforms AutoMix. AutoMix
is especially useful for limited data settings, with higher gains visible when dataset size is less than
1000.
A.3
POMDP-based Router in AutoMix
A router should direct a query to larger Language Models (LMs) only when the performance
gap justifies the cost-quality tradeoff. Given the inherent uncertainty in the true state of system
performance, which remains unobserved, we formulate the router as a Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (POMDP) [Åström, 1965]. POMDPs are particularly well-suited for scenarios
where observations, such as self-verification probabilities, may not be entirely reliable.
Recall that (Section 2) a POMDP is characterized by the tuple (S, A, T, R, Ω, O). In our application,
we define these components as follows:
16

States (S): The state space represents the current selected LMi (stage) and performance met-
rics (e.g., accuracy or F-score) of various LMs on a data point.
We denote this as S =
⟨i, PerfLM1, PerfLM2, . . . , PerfLMN ⟩, where i is the index of the current LM and PerfLMj
is the performance of the j-th LM. The terminal state is represented by S = ⟨N, . . .⟩, where N is the
total number of LMs.
Actions (A): The action space includes either retaining the current LM’s answer (a = LMi) or
routing to one of the larger LMs (denoted by Routej, j > i). For all LMs except LMN, routing to
an LMj implies performing both answer generation and self-verification.
Transition Function (T): The transition probabilities are deterministic since the true performance of
language models on a question is static, albeit unknown. However, the first dimension in the state
vector, representing the current LMi, changes to j if action Routej is taken or to N if the current
LM’s answer is retained. As the stage state always increases and is bounded by N, our problem has a
finite horizon.
Reward Function (R): The objective of our POMDP is to optimize a reward function R = P −λ·C,
where P is overall performance, C is overall cost, and λ is a tuning parameter that balances these
two criteria according to user preferences.
Observations (Ω): Observations come in the form of verifier outputs v from LMi, enabling the
POMDP to ascertain its belief state b, which is a probability distribution over S.
Observation Function (O): The observation probabilities P(o|s) indicate the likelihood of observing
o (verification output) given state s. These probabilities are crucial for defining the POMDP model.
For instance, high verifier confidence might suggest that the current LM’s performance PerfLMi is
sufficiently high, reducing the necessity to switch to a more costly LM.
To estimate the observation probabilities, we first consider the discrete case. In this scenario, we can
directly compute P(o|s) using:
P(o|s) =
P
(sj,vj)∈D 1{sj = s and vj = o}
P
sj∈D 1{sj = s}
where D represents the set of state-observation pairs from the training data.
However, in our continuous state space, we need to adapt this approach. We employ Kernel Density
Estimation (KDE), a non-parametric method for estimating probability density functions. Instead of
directly estimating P(o|s), we first learn a joint distribution P(S, O) using KDE. For this, we draw a
KDE at each training point:
ˆfh(x) = 1
nh
n
X
i=1
K
x −Xi
h

where K is a Gaussian kernel function, h is the bandwidth, and Xi are the sample points.
The conditional probability P(o|s) is then computed as:
P(o|s) = P(s, o)
P(s)
where P(s) is computed similar to P(s, o) These observation probabilities are estimated directly on
the training set by drawing KDEs for each training point.
By leveraging this POMDP formulation and the KDE-based observation model, our router can make
informed decisions about when to route queries to larger language models, effectively balancing
performance and cost considerations in the face of uncertainty.
A.3.1
Solving POMDP
Once all the different components of our POMDP are defined as shown above, finding an optimal
policy requires a suitable solver. An optimal policy in this context is a strategy π∗: B →A,
17

where B is the set of all possible belief states that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted
reward. However, our formulation presents unique challenges and opportunities that traditional
POMDP algorithms struggle to address efficiently. Our POMDP models a continuous state space
in an (N + 1)-dimensional space, where N is the number of language models. This continuous
nature poses difficulties for many traditional POMDP algorithms, such as point-based value iteration
methods, which are typically designed for discrete state spaces and can become computationally
intractable in continuous domains.
Nonetheless, our particular formulation has several desirable characteristics that distinguish it from
traditional POMDPs: 1. Finite and small horizon: Our problem has a limited number of decision
stages (maximum = N), bounding the depth of any decision tree we need to explore. 2. Finite and
small number of observations: The verifier outputs, which serve as our observations, are discrete
and limited in number (9), allowing enumeration of all possible observation sequences. 3. Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG) structure: In our formulation, a particular state is encountered only once, and
the problem progresses unidirectionally through the stages.
These characteristics allow us to detail a more tailored and efficient solution approach. We first
start by presenting a simple yet effective algorithm to solve our POMDP, which leverages these
properties to achieve decent speed and accuracy. The approach combines particle filtering for belief
state representation with a tree-based search strategy, as detailed in the following section.
POMDP Solver We start with a description of a simple POMDP solver to understand the intuition
behind how to solve POMDPs with our proposed formulation. Because of the multidimensional
continuous state space, we cannot represent all possible belief states explicitly. A common method to
approximate belief states in such cases is the use of particle filters.
Specifically, each particle represents a possible state of the system, and the belief state is represented
as a set of such particles. Mathematically, if we denote the set of particles by {s(i)}M
i=1, where M is
the number of particles, the belief state b at any time is approximated as
b(s) ≈1
M
M
X
i=1
δ(s −s(i))
where δ is the Dirac delta function.
To solve our POMDP, we construct a decision tree that represents the possible sequences of actions
and observations. This tree consists of two types of nodes: action nodes, which represent the selection
of a language model, and observation nodes, which represent the possible verifier outputs following an
action. After each observation node, we update the belief particles using the observation probabilities,
refining our estimate of the system’s state.
Assuming that we can explore and expand all nodes for small trees, we need to compute the value
of each node. We can compute the reward directly from the reward model for terminal nodes. For
any other node, the value V (b) is defined as the expected reward of the best action, which can be
recursively computed using:
V (b) = max
a
"
R(b, a) + γ
X
o
P(o | b, a)V (b′)
#
where b′ is the updated belief state after observing o following action a, and γ is the discount factor
set to 1 in our case.
One final step remains: how to update the belief states. This is done using particle filtering, as
described next. In particle filtering, belief states are updated by sampling from the current belief state
based on the observation probabilities.
Mathematically, unweighted particle filtering updates can be described as follows. Given a set of
particles {s(i)
t }M
i=1 representing the belief state at time t, and an observation ot, the updated set of
particles {s(i)
t+1}M
i=1 is obtained by:
1. For each particle s(i)
t , sample a new state s(i)
t+1 according to the transition model P(st+1 |
s(i)
t , at).
18
