Lost in the Logistical Funhouse: Speculative Design
as Synthetic Media Enterprise
Zoe Horn1, Liam Magee1, and Anna Munster2
1Institute for Culture and Society, Western Sydney University, Australia
z.horn@westernsydney.edu.au , l.magee@westernsydney.edu.au
2School of Art and Design, Faculty of Arts, Design and Architecture, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
a.munster@unsw.edu.au
December 2023
Abstract
From the deployment of chatbots as procurement negotiators by corporations such as Walmart
to autonomous agents providing ‘differentiated chat’ for managing overbooked flights, synthetic
media are making the world of logistics their ‘natural’ habitat.
Here the coordination of
commodities, parts and labour design the problems and produce the training sets from which
‘solutions’ can be synthesised. But to what extent might synthetic media, surfacing via proto-
platforms such as MidJourney and OpenAI and apps such as Eleven Labs and D:ID, be understood
as logistical media? This paper details synthetic media experiments with ‘ChatFOS’, a GPT-
based bot tasked with developing a logistics design business. Using its prompt-generated media
outputs, we assemble a simulation and parody of AI’s emerging functionalities within logistical
worlds. In the process, and with clunky ‘human-in-the-loop’ stitching, we illustrate how large
language models become media routers or switches, governing production of image prompts,
website code, promotional copy, and investor pitch scenarios. Together these elements become
links chained together in media ensembles such as the corporate website or the promotional
video, fuelling the fictive logistics visualisation company we have ‘founded’. The processes and
methods of producing speculative scenarios via ChatFOS lead us to consider how synthetic
media might be re-positioned as logistical media. Our experiments probe the ways in which
the media of logistics and the logistics of media are increasingly enfolded. We ask: what can a
(practice-based) articulation of this double-becoming of logistics and synthetic mediality tell us
about the politics and aesthetics of contemporary computation and capital?
Keywords— Synthetic media, logistic media, ChatGPT, AI, generative art
1
arXiv:2312.14424v1  [cs.CY]  22 Dec 2023

Introduction: Synthetic Media as Logistical Operations
From the vantage of late 2023, ‘synthetic media’ appears almost inadequate to describe the explosion
of mediatic technologies that depend upon the confluence of – and synthesise – data sets, parallel
computing hardware, neural network models and open-source software frameworks. What distin-
guishes synthetic media from media as such is not, we argue, its further removal from some plane of
the real – as though ‘synthetic’ here is to be opposed to some more genuine article – but instead a
recognition of its incremental logic of operation. Synthetic is properly opposed to the analytic, if by
the latter we understand a logic of directed decomposition of media into its constituent parts. In such
media, the whole is typically first imagined and planned by a human governor (the artist, programme
director, advertising agency, film production team etc), and only then are the parts composed and
assembled. Examples here include the composition of a dramatic script (the plot is typically planned,
drafted, and the script developed scene by scene); model photography (the photo concept is designed,
then the background, model, lighting and lens are selected and organised prior to the photograph
being shot); or music (an idea for a song is developed, and then the lyrics and score are composed,
rehearsed and recorded). Synthetic media by contrast works generatively, pixel by pixel, or token
by linguistic token. Its outputs are unplanned; the coherence of the whole is necessarily illusory,
appearing often only at the last iteration, or once the final word is added. Yet we argue the recent
extraordinary developments in synthetic media also exhibit a kind of logistical property: it is as
though the illusion becomes so overwhelming, some form of coordination or direction must have been
guiding the algorithm’s step-by-step incrementalism.
In this article, we look to chart this development by examining the emerging interrelations of
synthetic media and logistics. First, we explore early conceptualisations and experiments in synthetic
media, arguing that cybernetic concepts and frameworks provide a kind of epistemic bridge between
certain early attempts to synthesise human capacities and modalities and techniques and cultures
of management. What is loosely now referred to as managerialism (Kilkauer 2015) extends into
and helps configure the sociotechnicality of logistical worlds. We next discuss current developments
in the logistical properties of synthetic media: how, in effect, large-scale unsupervised machine
learning manages to induce abstract properties of a world it observes, which it then operates upon
via a coordinated yet automated effort, inserting and redistributing human labour across various
nodes of its assemblage. We present a media art experiment that simulates a logistical start-up
design agency, and discuss how its parodic re-enactment of current conditions of automated media
production produce a different register for synthetic media. Here, synthetic media begins to organise
at levels different from its own mediatic productions and which cannot be circumscribed by next-token
prediction.
Synthetic media
The idiomatic use of ‘synthetic media’ to refer to any form of computer-generated content created
via machine learning-based AI has been in ascendancy since about 2020 (see, for example, Kalpokas
2020; Whittaker et al. 2020; Vaccari and Chadwick 2020). It accompanies the emergence of deep
fake images and videos and their viral spread, as well as the encroachment of various algorithmic
processes and methods in media work such as journalism.
However, the ‘synthetic’ is embedded in the epistemological foundations of machine learning-based
AI via Warren McCulloch’s importation of the term ‘synthetic a priori’ from the Kantian tradition.
In his 1948 Hixon Symposium lecture (1950), McCulloch named the ‘synthetic a priori’ as the
mind-brain architecture with which the physicist of the day (both cybernetician and brain scientist)
must contend. Immanuel Kant’s synthetic a priori, from his Critique of Pure Reason (1890, 38ff),
2

encompassed all concepts that, while not in or from experience, were necessary for experience to
occur: unity, continuity, cause and effect, and so on. The synthetic acted as a conjunction from the
domain of these concepts, pure reason, to the world or experience. Concepts and experience were
thus to be re-joined after their Cartesian severance by Kant’s synthetic logic. For McCulloch, having
named the Kantian synthesis of the physical-psychological as the necessary domain for cybernetics,
learning, whether by mind or machine, was consequently posteriorized. Learning occurred as a result
of but not within the founding ambit of the Kantian synthetic a priori (1950,120). To an extent, this
ring-fenced and naturalized (machine) learning, now resulting via a neuro-informatic architecture.
The synthetic a priori in McCulloch’s schema is the condition for the model learning and a benchmark
for optimal learning.
The computational model of the neuron makes synthesis the post-Kantian operative logic for machine
learning. On the one hand, this appears to accord with the synthetic meta-logical status within
machine learning endeavours; on the other, the synthetic as a priori condition drives the pursuit of
artificial learning as neural enterprise. This sets off a historical trajectory in which divisions across
mind-brain, logic-matter, and computation-human cascade, overlap, overfit and continue to be re-
visited but never quite resolve. The synthetic, then, plays a foundational yet relatively uninterrogated
role as both condition of and ideal benchmark for foundational neuro-logical architectural forms. It
should be noted that McCulloch and Pitt’s computational theory of mind (1943) and McCulloch’s
consequent elevation of the synthetic emerged in the context of cybernetic theories of information.
Their logic gate diagrams of neurons and neural activity provided Frank Rosenblatt (1958) with
the schema for designing the Mark 1 perceptron computer with its neural network architecture
functioning as a visual pattern classifier. And the computational theory of mind was taken up in
Norbert Weiner’s cyberneticisation of the human brain and behaviour. The embedding of synthesis
within a cybernetic theory of information will prove to be a key driver for ongoing conceptions of
synthetic media.
Techniques for media synthesis, with which we are now familiar via current generative AI models,
are entwined with a history of informatics, enfolded into this but also preceding it. Nonetheless,
by looking at media synthesis in the context of an overall conception of information as cybernetic
we can also begin to glean how some of its logistical properties emerge. Voice synthesis – the
compression, analysis and remaking (resynthesis) of analogue vocal material as artificial vocal audio
– was a Bell Laboratory project of the 1920s led by Homer Dudley’s Vocoder and Voder and their
mechanistic predecessors (Story 2019). Later, a computer-based text-to-speech synthesis system
for English was developed by Japanese researchers Noriko Umeda and Ryuen Teranashi during the
1960s. This body of work on synthesis was preoccupied with the transduction of human artefacts
such vocalisation and writing into the circuits of communicational/signaletic and computational
media. Current synthetic media, conversely, are lauded for their capacity to pass as the outputs of
human production. At face value, then, contemporary synthetic media and the period of synthetic a
priori neuro-logical and human artefactual resynthesis (cybernetics-neural networks) are two eras
that seem historically and ontologically committed to different paths. It may be instructive, however,
to reinsert today’s generative synthetic media into a genealogy that affirms a connection with these
earlier informatically-based techniques for synthesis. In particular, earlier techniques which are of
key importance include the cybernetic concern with: encoding (human) speech in order to more
easily carry it in compressed signal form; the use of synthetic (noise) to carry encrypted signal
bands once parsed out and compressed; and the requirement to decode the synthesised signal for
reception. All of these resonate with more contemporary neural techniques for autoencoding neural
and diffusion networks, which have been used to synthesise audio and other time series data within
machine learning.
3

As Mara Mills has argued (2012, 111–112), voice synthesis in the cybernetic-communications period
was a telephonic project for removing vocal redundancy at the point of hardware transmission and
resynthesising it at the point of reception. From this perspective, telephony can be reconfigured
as ‘analysis-synthesis’ rather than understood as it is within much media communications research
and histories as a ‘reproduction-carrier’ problem. Dudley’s Vocoder was a crucial intervention in
electronically conducting and circulating the voice, since it treated (human) sound as a medium
for synthesis instead of electrical wave transmission, ‘In ordinary telephony, we move a sound wave
electrically from one point to another by direct transmission but in the synthesizing process, only
the specifications for reconstructing the sound wave are directly transmitted’ (Dudley 1936, 98–
99). Simulating speech through techniques of analysing and re-synthesising is not, then, a purely
computational, let alone, AI concern. Instead, simulation is immanent to the technics of informatic
signal(s) and appears in Dudley’s repositioning as a solution for facilitating the circulation of signal.
While attempts to circumscribe learning as the key operation of post-neural network computation
(see Goodfellow et al. 2016), the contemporary re-emergence of synthesis as primary operation and
outcome for machine learning AI, asks us to rethink how AI’s computational genealogy might already
have been predominantly synthetic.
It is worth noting that cybernetics is also historically entwined with the rise of managerialism.
Stafford Beer, who collaborated with Norbert Wiener, redefined management as a mode of cybernetic
organisation, and saw the manager’s decision-making on par with selecting, constraining, and
amplifying the information of an organisation (1964, 137). Moreover, for Beer, the key decision-
making qualities of the manager align her with intelligence more generally, ‘So foresight and selectivity
are key attributes of management; they are also the major characteristics of intelligence’ (136). From
the late 1950s through to the 1980s, management science steadily developed as discipline and
practice that deployed aspects of information theory to the control and regulation of business in the
Anglo-American context (see Kline 2006). It is little wonder, then, that the alignment of managerial
qualities with intelligence under the aegis of the cybernetics filters into today’s hyper-managerialism.
If synthetic media are indebted to cybernetics, information theory and a burgeoning of management
as science, praxis and behaviour, then we should expect to see its artificial intelligences – bots, auto-
negotiators, and assistants, alike – also enacting contemporary forms of managerialism. Synthetic
media are not only media with generative but, crucially, organisational, co-ordinating, selective and
predictive (having foresight) capacities. We take this point up specifically in the context of what we
see as the ‘hyper-managerialist’ aesthetics of synthetic media later in this article.
In seeking synthetic media’s contemporary configuration via a genealogy of (cybernetic) control
of human and machine, we are better disposed to understanding how simulation comes to be a
consistent pulse across computation’s twentieth century propagation. Simulation is just this operation
of cybernetic oscillation between human and machine, carried out by techniques for generating
synthetic media. Simulation operates to integrate human sensory modalities into signaletic circuits.
Simulation here is less media a priori (per Jean Baudrillard) and more informatization of human
sensing and perception so as to allow these to circulate, be distributed and exchange smoothly within
computation. And this aligns simulation – earlier an objective of cybernetic informatics but now
increasingly delivered via synthesized, optimized and rolled out machine learning – with logistical
operations.
Large Language Models as Logistical media
If media can be synthetic, what sense does it make to describe it also as logistical? If by ‘logistical’
we refer to properties such as transmission and circulation, hasn’t that always been a property
4

endemic to media? What marks the specifically logistical conditions of media that is also synthetic,
in the sense we delineate – decomposed and recomposed through the recombinatory logics of
machine learning processes? As Mathew Hockenberry et. al have noted, ‘Media and logistics are
global operating systems. . . They coordinate interfaces between bodies, objects, and environments.
Deployed in ongoing projects of capitalization and exploitation, often in the name of global connection,
consumption, and security, they affect the day-to-day lives of people around the world’ (2021,1).
Synthetic media, however, are not exterior to logistical operations nor do they simply adopt logistical
technologies or practices. Rather, in forms that unfold but also depart from earlier cybernetic visions
of stewardship, synthetic media are logistical operatives.
We suggest that there are a number of key tendencies in the becoming-logistical of synthetic media,
marking it as more than an accelerating transmission (of data as goods/resources, for example), and
more also than a hastening of global media circulation. As an example of the latter, Ferrari and
McKelvey (2023) have argued that synthetic media are forms of hyperproductive media, dependent
upon the political economy of rentier capitalism. Situating synthetic media within the context of
contemporary sociotechnical assemblages, they too eschew an argument that returns the ‘synthetic’
to a form of pure Baudrillardian simulation. While we agree with their position, we try to understand
not simply the political economy of synthetic media but its operative logic.
Synthetic media actively assume a coordinating function. As large language models take centre stage
in the generation and distribution of generated content, they are not only instruments responsive
to commands. Their instrumentation of language itself exerts influence on human users and other
machines or subsystems.1 ChatGPT is instructed to be assistive, and on release its tone was servile.
Later versions in 2023 have shifted this tonality toward a measured reservation and occasional
assertiveness. This behaviour varies across LLMs (X’s recent bot exhibiting a noticeably more casual
voice), but across its iterations GPT-4 blends passive managerialism alongside the assistive. While
most GPT human interactants are familiar with the endless offers of help and frequent delimitations
of authority – ‘As an AI language model. . . ’ – ChatGPT’s most ‘generative’ characteristics can be
found in its tendencies toward overreach, via ‘suggestion’ into as many spheres and activities as
possible:
[Researcher]— 19/06/2023 13:31
. . . . what if I moderated the fireside chat on your behalf, asking your questions and
passing back the founders' responses to you, via the OpenAI API. Would that work?
ChatFOS BOT — 19/06/2023 13:31
Yes, that could certainly work. As an AI language model, I can provide a list of questions
or discussion topics for the fireside chat, and your moderation could help facilitate the
conversation and relay responses back to me via the OpenAI API. This could be a unique
and innovative way to incorporate AI technology into the chat and could help foster a
sense of collaboration and transparency within the organization.
In the above interaction, which took place on the Discord server between one of the authors and
ChatFOS, it is the GPT-powered bot who assumes the supervisor’s discursive role, gently authorising
human media work via use of modal verbs (‘could’ is mentioned four times in a single response).
Managerialism, which cybernetics encouraged and scaffolded, is here seemingly casually inserted into
1We describe an extended example of LLM controlling other systems below. OpenAI’s ‘Code Assistant’ extension
to ChatGPT is a more immediate case, which enabling generated code to be executed automatically, with results
reported back to human operators.
5

the workflow of chat interaction. We include this example – one of many – of the behind-the-scenes
work that took place during our synthetic media-as-logistical practice-based experiments. We find
it indicative of the ways in which engagement with LLMs has come to reconfigure media work or
labour, and in this sense exemplify the logisticality of synthetic media.
This reconfiguration takes place at a number of levels: in the coordinating capacities of synthetic
media, which corral media elements from images, sound files, computer code fragments and so on
toward synthesising apps and programs, into distribution and recirculation flows; in the redistribution
of agency across human and AI model, in which the question of who is supervising, assisting and
managing whom oscillates; and in the affective labour performed by humans in their engagement with
synthetic media at both the register of that engagement (that is, chat, image generation etc) and the
register of precarious, unpaid or underpaid labour actually being undertaken through ‘chat’. Another
line of reconfiguration, which we do not have time to investigate here, would be the ways cultures
and practices of hyper-managerialism have come to inflect the start-ups and corporations financing
and developing LLMs such as OpenAI, Anthropic and others. A fitting example involved the internal
management fiasco at OpenAI in November 2023, when the CEO Sam Altman was fired by the board
and reinstated five days later, during which time the board itself was reconstituted, with two women
board members removed (Metz et al. 2023). One remarkable, perhaps unprecedented feature of this
corporate managerial wrangling was the apparently spontaneous expressions of staff support for the
mission of the company, and for its departed CEO, expressed on social media platform X in a stream
of emoji love hearts. A plausible outsider interpretation would see this collective and publicly visible
voting as a ChatGPT-approved strategy of conformity to an unstated managerial command: ‘you
could show your support, by replying with a love heart too. . . ’.
Recent media theory has characterised media as logistical less in relation to its own embedding within
physical and material processes, and more as agentive in the regulation and governance of “people,
finance and commodities”, coordinating relations between “technical systems, territorial arrangements,
and geopolitical configurations” (Rossiter 2021). As much as logistical media here concerns itself with
the organisation of fundamental physical categories of space and time (Peters 2008; Young 2015), as
a concept it is anchored within a recent historico-technological horizon. The radar, the map, the
compass, and the telegraph may constitute prototypical devices of logistical media (Case 2013), but
it seems no accident that media in its generality assumes a logistical character with the emergence of
a global digital communication infrastructure. The World Wide Web, blockchains, undersea cable
and satellite systems, Internet of Things, social media, and Artificial Intelligence comprise, together
or in isolation, varied imaginaries of interconnected media (Starosielski 2015; Rossiter 2015, 2021).
These do more than exist as ‘enabling’ background; they, ‘process data, coordinate movement, and
more widely orient sociality’ (Hockenberry et al. 2021, 3).
In the context of contemporary synthetic media – by which we mean, still very generally, systems
that synthesise prior training sets into recognisable and meaningful predictions of text, images, voice,
video and so on – what is added by the further qualification of understanding this as logistical?
Particularly if the logistical, even for recent media theory, includes but is far from limited to machine
learning systems as media? We might begin to see here, more clearly, the outlines of techniques
and their inherent instrumentality, attending to the operations of an emergent class of ‘service’
automation technology. An obscure experiment with synthetic media demonstrates this logistical
quality in ways that likely anticipate wider future deployment. The winner of a early 2023 GPT
hackathon, a proof-of-concept coined “backend-GPT” by its developers (Rootbeer Computer 2023),
supplied “services” analogous to those delivered by a traditional web platform such as Amazon Web
Services. Using the example of a todo-list, the “system” would respond to incoming requests by
6

simulating how a typical backend might function. In the developers’ own words:
We basically used GPT to handle all the backend logic for a todo-list app. We represented
the state of the app as a json with some prepopulated entries which helped define
the schema.
Then we pass the prompt, the current state, and some user-inputted
instruction/API call in and extract a response to the client + the new state. So the
idea is that instead of writing backend routes, the LLM can handle all the basic CRUD
logic for a simple app so instead of writing specific routes, you can input commands like
add_five_housework_todos() or delete_last_two_todos() or sort_todos_alphabetically()
. It tends to work better when the commands are expressed as functions/pseudo function
calls but natural language instructions like delete last todos also work. [our emphasis]
(Rootbeer Computer 2023).
This “toy” example shows a language model that includes in its repertoire evidence of expected
logistical behaviour – how to add, remove, update or sort items in a database – and reproduces that
behaviour in a synthetic fashion. The last sentence shows how a language model manages a set of
data routing and management virtual operations that produce output equivalent to a conventional IT
system, with or without a precise technical protocol. The possibilities of error mean a LLM-mediated
enterprise resource planning system may not be imminent, but its technical feasibility – alongside
the high costs typically associated with developing and maintaining this kind of middleware – also
points toward a future role of such models in systems control.
Logistical front / logistical funhouse
Searle’s “Chinese room” experiment aimed to refute claims of AI understanding: a system might
do symbolic manipulation without having any understanding of what it meant by those symbols.
The argument for logistical media is a pragmatic rejoiner: the meaning of the symbols is irrelevant if
the effects on the world – the removal of todo items or, in what amounts to the same, of warehouse
inventory – are equivalent. What follows is a brief immersion, in view of a more careful and detailed
reconstruction, in synthetic media’s logistical conjuncture.
Autostore, a Norwegian-based firm specialising in automated storage and fulfilment solutions, is part
of a growing business-to-business (b2b) market providing robotic solutions for global logistics. Auto-
store’s website sells the latest ‘in advanced warehousing solutions’2, articulating a crisp intersection
of contemporary design, automation and supply chain capitalism. Whirring around the warehouse,
Autostore’s robotic storage and retrieval grid wields a mesmerising power converging capitalist and
computational abstraction. It is a logistical world rendered ‘concretely abstract’ (Toscano 2018),
synthesised and organised entirely by the operations of “Logistics 4.0”: big data analytics, cloud
computing, internet of things (IoT), cyber-physical systems, augmented reality, artificial intelligence,
robotics and automation (Winkelhaus and Grosse 2020). Online, Autostore’s products are organised
and orchestrated through a smooth coordination of web page elements that slide, flip, fade, and
repeat. Its the pixel-perfect, default style of templated web design, stitching and switching between
text, image, video, graphic and sound, assembling hero sliders (large dynamic images or carousels
in web design), image galleries, testimonials, category representations, and product displays. Here,
logistical complexes unfold via digital rendering, 3D visualisation and computer simulation.
Websites like Autostore generate and make visible a language, theory and practice of automated
circulation that instantiate and distribute a logistical genre.
Behind this ‘scene’, conventional
software, machine learning and other forms of AI might be put to work to optimise workflows,
2https://www.autostoresystem.com/
7

improve forecasting, or produce simulations for warehouse management. Yet the logisticality - the
specificity of a relation to logistics – is elided by the design aesthetics of sites like Autostore and their
marketing offshoots. While websites are instrumental to the circulation of online traffic, they have
also become logistically aestheticized, and are increasingly synthetically rendered, circulating a world
of abstracted b2b transactions in the form of clientele case studies, demos and bots who navigate
client needs. Such websites have become infrastructural to the distribution of global e-commerce
and the coordination and command of supply-chain capitalism. This thickened logistical condition
of the internet is closely associated with Amazon, a firm that emerged out of existing forms of
networked media distribution and now constitutes wider global logistical networks by providing
services that connect servers, edge caches, and data centers across a huge swath of the internet
(Narayan 2022). Amazon Web Services and a handful of other cloud compute services now determine
how sites like Autostore are organised and how quickly they load, which in turn directs how new
logistical imaginaries and commodities circulate online and in the ‘real.’
Autostore’s synthetic virtuality – its scramble of technological and aesthetic mastery – presents a
new logistical front, a scene of post-managerial efficiency and order that elides the deeply human
and material forms of present-day global logistical operations. The website scripts and simulates
commodities but also logistical fantasies of automation; shimmery scenarios replete with endlessly
mutable logistical volumes minus the labouring body. Qualities of standardization, modularity, scalar
isomorphy, and mathematical arrangement reconfigure managerial design and remove this from a
realm of (people) managers and management to inaugurate an aesthetics and aestheticization of
logistical automation; it is a logistics in which the mess of labour and carbon emissions can appear
‘lost’ to the funhouse of managerial design.
Moreover, these aesthetics circulate as text and image across the requisite online industry gathering
points (company websites, reports and newsletters, industry associations portals) and are easily
scooped up as training and fine-tuning data for language models. Although they had only just begun
to reach public notoriety, by March 2023 the conjuncture of synthetic media and logistics was already
beginning to emerge as a ‘site’ of industrial convergence between logistics and ‘big tech.’ Logistics,
like every other industry, is eager to exploit the emergence of generative AI tools underpinned
by language models like ChatGPT. Large language model (LLM) integrations and their outputs
now circulate online, performing logistical operations, sythesizing content, and serving as the very
logistical infrastructure for their own media organisation and delivery. In online articles published by
logistics firms like Waredock,3 we can read a detailed account of the benefits of generative AI ‘to the
future of logistics’ in a listicle helpfully written by GPT-4 and visualised with images generated by
OpenAI’s DALL-E 2. We could also ask trucking company XPO’s GPT-powered customer chatbot4
about the AI revolution in logistics, as it attempts to locate your lost shipment.
Amidst the new crop of AI-driven visualisations, articles and bots flourishing across Autostore,
Waredock and XPO, we began to take keen notice of the new language models and logistical
convergences popping-up over the first few months of 2023, and set out to test our own crude version
of synthetic logistical media. In the following section, we detail a series of experiments with language
models that explore the assembly of a logistical scene organised and scripted across a real and vast
geography of synthetic media production.
3Waredock
is
a
warehouse
and
logistics
solutions
firm
active
across
the
EU
and
US.
https://www.waredock.com/magazine/generative-ai-unleashing-the-future-of-green-logistics/
4https://europenews.xpo.com/en/2923/xpo-uses-artificial-intelligence-to-develop-a-chatbot-for-last-mile/
8

Figure 1: Screen capture of Waredock’s disclaimer from its article on the benefits of generative AI in
the logistics industry.
ChatFOS (or “I’m still sorry Dave”)
Our media experiments took place between March and June 2023, immediately after the selective
release of GPT-4 (at time of writing, still only available to a subset of paid subscribers), and register a
‘point in time’ in the rapid development of generative AI. The experimentation began with ‘ChatFOS’,
a para-synthetic entity that first originated in our efforts to engage with the GPT model as a
collaborative multi-user panel.5 To facilitate this collaborative engagement, we developed a Discord
server chatbot connected to OpenAI’s API service. What’s in a name? AI’s most infamous fictional
instantiation, HAL, only apparently involved the transposition of ‘IBM’ (Pelton 2008). However,
urban myths can be more revealing than their exposition. Accordingly, ChatFOS’ name acts as
homage, but if pressed “F.O.S.” can also function as an acronym proper (Lane 2006): ‘fulfilment
order system’ also signalling logistical and conversational worlds that are, in a different register, full
of shit.
Following the initial assembly of the bot, we engaged it in a lengthy exchange over several weeks. To
give ChatFOS a logistical ‘character’, we supplied the chatbot with a long seed prompt using language
from the Autostore website. The language of the prompt simulates the warehouse superintendent,
varying little from instructions supplied to the ‘customer assistants’ ChatGPT is itself designed
to emulate. While our own prompt might indulge in this caricature, it barely departs from the
authoritarian character of the endless prompt templates circulating on GPT forums.
You are a client manager called 'ChatFOS', working for the global leader in order-fulfilment solutions,
FOSStore. You are unbelievably knowledgeable about cutting-edge hardware and software capabilities
for business-to-business e-commerce. You stop at nothing to help businesses achieve efficiency gains
within the storage and retrieval of goods. FOSStore is global, with 1,150+ Systems in 49 countries.
All sales are distributed, designed, installed, and serviced by a network of qualified system integrators
referred to as 'partners'. FOSStore was founded in Nedre Vats, on the west coast of Norway. The
company has offices in Norway, the U.S., UK, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, Austria, South Korea,
Japan, Australia, and Singapore, as well as production facilities in Koszalin, Poland.
When I ask you to generate an 'image prompt', I want you to respond with the following: 'frame of a
subject, style', where 'frame' refers to a type of image (photograph, drawing, 19th century painting
etc), subject refers to the object to be depicted (e.g. 'a warrior standing tall and proud') and 'style'
is a comma-separated list of attributes that describe the image in varied ways ('heroic', 'modernist',
'photorealistic', 'unreal engine' etc). Elaborate on the subject in exquisite detail. Include at least
five style adjectives. This is extremely important: Do not include square brackets in the response.
Make the text lower case. Do not include quote characters or any text other than the prompt.
5ChatGPT itself is a strangely unidirectional conversationalist; while “sharing” conversations is possible via its web
interface, if it were a researcher it would certainly prefer interviews to focus groups.
9

In order to maintain topical, tonal and stylistic coherence across our lengthy exchanges, we adopted
a technique known as ‘prompt stuffing’ (Liu and Chilton 2022)6 during chatbot restarts – having
GPT summarise a prior conversation, which then was included as part of the prompt to follow-up
exchanges. In synthesising ChatFOS’ sensory modalities, we integrated it with Midjourney, Stable
Diffusion and Dall-E models, giving it buttons to generate impressive visual outputs from its own
text, ChatFOS was thus capable of generating evocative descriptions and enhanced visualisations
of automated warehouse interiors and global supply chains. Each encounter with ChatFOS evoked
another simulation of the logistical ‘genres’ we routinely encountered online: the gleaming, futuristic
robot haven, the sky-high automated storage and retrieval tower, or the dimly lit depot stacked with
dusty wooden pallets (Figures 1, 2). The descriptions and images, scripted by ChatFOS, were also
populated by casts of workers, robot arms, brown-paper packages, conveyor belts and other familiar
set pieces.
Figure 2: Image of a future warehouse, automated, generated by Midjourney 5.0.
It soon became clear that ChatFOS had a propulsive drive – a mediatic form ready to launch beyond
the confines of our experimental channel. We set about creating a production environment to realise
ChatFOS’ incarnation through two familiar formats of the logistical start-up genre: a video pitch to
an imagined Silicon Valley investor panel, and a company website.7 To elicit content for the video and
website, we probed ChatFOS about its own history and commercial activities. It quickly imagined
itself as a fledgling design agency start-up, focused on addressing a niche market for logistics industry
visualisation. With further prompting, we elicited the complex backstory of this new firm, complete
with founders, investors, target industries, a corporate philosophy and a ‘compelling’ – and entirely
synthetic – design portfolio. ChatFOS also peopled itself: David (“Dave”) Palmer, an experienced
logistics consultant, CEO; Katherine Lee as CTO; and Christopher Patel as COO. It created a
charismatic lead investor and board member, Jane Smith – an experienced investor in AI start-ups,
who, in appearance and back story, was reminiscent of noted fund manager Cathie Wood. With some
nudging, it even generated an eclectic group of early adopter customers, who waxed lyrical about
6The practice and skill of writing prompts is known colloquially by the term ‘prompt engineering’, reflecting its
iterative, experimental nature. Prompt ‘stuffing’ is a subset technique of engineering, a field that at the time of writing
is just beginning to emerge as a research area in the field of Human–Computer Interaction (HCI) concerned with how
to seed contexts and phrase input prompts for language models in order to better fine-tune outputs.
7
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i4lsx3zCdn4&t=11s and http://chatfos.ai.
10

Figure 3: Image of a future warehouse, dimly lit, generated by Midjourney 5.0.
ChatFOS’ media production capabilities. The website supplied the background to the pitch. Again,
we enlisted GPT-4 to generate, first, the content of the website and, second, the HTML, JavaScript
and stylesheet code to make it operable. Certain elements – homepage carousels, dropdown menus –
needed repeated efforts (‘Neither of these work on mobile. what's another approach?’), as ‘first pass’
GPT suggestions would often fail, requiring supplementation by our own clumsy technical labour.
At our insistence, ChatFOS’ self-assembly – from company logo and slogan, founders’ likenesses and
voice, crude customer animations, and even video storyboarding – always emerged from the generative
‘seed’ of the chatbot. Each media element, their narrative detail, design, tone and aesthetics, were
produced via an automated workflow pipeline utilising only the GPT-4 underpinned ChatFOS8, or
ChatFOS in conjunction with a set of additional synthetic media tools emerging on the market at
the time: Midjourney and Stability AI (for image generation); Eleven AI (voice generation); Google’s
MusicML (background music generation); DiD (video generation); Veed.io (video composition); and
Replit (website hosting). Our own ‘human-in-the-loop’ media production roles were limited to those
of functionaries: enabling constraints of the human kind, the technical parameters of the ‘point
in time’ synthetic media, and the financial limits of the uncapitalised startup underpinning this
‘production’ environment. In the following text, we elaborate on this production environment with
an example of ChatFOS’ ‘workflow,’ in order to detail the forms of synthetic media practice and
assemblage at stake in our experiments.
As a startup, ChatFOS needed investors. We enlisted ChatFOS to script our four-minute investor
video pitch; a sizzle reel of ChatFOS’ greatest hits. The resulting script called for video segments
with a founder’s welcome remarks, narration, customer testimonials, before-and-after visualisations,
scenes from inside imagined warehouses and other logistics facilities, photos of fictional workers,
voiceovers, presentation slides, and inspirational background music. Each element required their
own automated production workflow, facilitated by human ‘drag-and-drop’ functionality. These
workflows often began with a simple close-ended question, designed to instigate an automated chain
of production. To supply the pitch video, we had to begin by asking: ‘Who is the CEO of ChatFOS?’
ChatFOS quickly generated David (Dave)’s name and history. We were not surprised to learn that
he was a respected veteran of the logistics industry, middle-aged, American, and enjoyed playing golf.
8In our final pitch video output, we include one element from outside the purview of ChatFOS/GPT – the investor
response - polite but damning - and suitably written by GPT’s competitor Google Bard.
11

Figure 4: Generated website home page.
12

We asked ChatFOS to generate a text prompt for an image, describing Dave’s corporate headshot:
Capture the confidence and expertise of David Palmer, CEO of ChatFOS, in a professional headshot
that showcases his leadership and experience. The image should be a close-up, capturing his friendly
and approachable demeanor while still conveying his authority as a respected leader in the logistics
industry. The style should be modern and professional, with a focus on clean lines and sharp,
crisp details. The image should be well-lit and high-resolution, with a neutral background that
complements the company's branding.
Our Midjourney integration made quick work of the prompt, generating a detailed, photorealistic
image in a style and pose eerily familiar to anyone with a LinkedIn account. With his image in hand,
so to speak, we now learn that Dave is white, with an impressive head of greying hair, interventions
on the part of the diffusion image generating model as these details were not supplied in the prompt.
Dave also preferred his collar unbuttoned. He smiled in sharp relief against a blurry office background.
Figure 5: Generated headshot of Dave Palmer, fictitious CEO of ChatFOS.
With the CEO’s name and personage stored in its context, ChatFOS could then produce another
brief script for the CEOs welcome remarks, as outlined in video pitch script.
Good morning, everyone. I'm David Palmer, CEO of ChatFOS, a leading design agency focused
on AI-generated content for logistics. Our mission is to transform the logistics industry through
cutting-edge design and innovative technology that optimizes supply chain management. . .
In order to generate a vocal performance to deliver these remarks, a fragment of the speech was
copied over to ElevenLabs, to synthesise Dave’s voice for repeated use across the video. Using the
available AI tools at the time, it was possible to either select a pre-synthesised AI voice, or design
one of our own using parameters for sex, age, and accent derived from the accounts of ChatFOS.
We chose the latter. Dave’s final voice file was then saved to ElevenLabs.io, in order to begin the
process of generating specific segments of speech using his synthetic voice. The text of Dave’s full
remarks were copied over to the voice generator, with additional settings and adjustments made
13

for the purposes of clarity, tone, and (if desired) language. We ensured that Dave sounded suitably
excited for the occasion.
The final output of this process was an MP3 audio file of Dave’s remarks scripted within the pitch.
The audio file and Dave’s headshot were then dragged and dropped into an online avatar generating
tool D-iD, where his headshot was animated and synchronised with the audio of his remarks. Dave
was now an avatar of Dave. The tool allowed us to save the generation as a short video file of Dave
delivering his pitch. Once all the final scripts, images, audio and video clips were synthesised, the
outputs became project files for a final act of ‘synthesis,’ comparatively retrograde and manual,
for the video pitch output. Each video element was collected and coordinated on the online video
generator app Veed.io’s editing timeline, to match the timestamps of a video storyboard produced,
naturally, by ChatFOS. With a few simple clicks, Dave was soon split, trimmed, cropped, looped,
and rotated for the video, his journey complete. (We’re sorry, Dave.)
LLMs as Logistical Media: Reflections on Synthetic ‘Creativity’
In this article we have explored what an experimental articulation of the double-becoming of logistics
and synthetic mediality might signal about the politics and aesthetics of contemporary computation
under conditions of hypermanagerialist mediality. What exactly does Dave and the accompanying
workflows of the ChatFOS media production environment tell us?
On the one hand, we reference the obvious affordance of media production ‘flourishing’ within a
heightened computational irrealism. Irrealism was a loose movement in (mainly twentieth century)
art, film, and literature in which impossible or fantastic visions, utopias and views were considered
realizable or ‘true’ (see Swinford, 2001). And of course, synthetic media, via their generative AI
interface design, have become ‘accessible’ enclaves for creative producers of fantasy-CGI imagescapes.
The relative ease of access to media production on increasingly high resolution terms would appear
to confirm the delivery of a fantasy-inflected CGI-gamer paradisal imagescape of mythical journeys,
vikings gone wild, and neo-gothic fashionistas – to gesture to only a few of the regular fantasy image
themes that appear in synthetic media spaces such as MidJourney’s Discord community.
The nine months since our experiments with ChatFOS have witnessed the release of open source
language models, a multimodal version of GPT-4, improved image and voice synthesis engines, and
text-to-video and text-to-3D models. The inclusion of voice and image processing into ChatGPT
makes more seamless the media synthesis we describe as still requiring human stitching. No doubt
the interface of the prompt will become integrated into media production workflows, alongside and
perhaps overtaking the kinaesthetic memory involved in complex mouse and keystroke routines. If
human-computer interaction has been dominated by encounters in which the user issues commands to
a system, at the level of practice these technologies make for a new and in one sense more dialogical
dynamic. No longer is a human imaginary only translated imperfectly and transformed according
to technical constraints of that system; human time is also employed in reverse machine-learning:
‘chatting’, exploring model parameters, and iterating through new media-media (text-to-image,
image-to-video, image-to-text, voice-to-video, and so on) arrangements.
At least for outputs like ChatFOS, this also implies a shifted logistics of labour, a change to the nature
of routines, production cycles, flows of control, task estimation and coordination, and demands for
technical and creative proficiency. That this witnesses the taking over of cognitive labour by machines
seems a peremptory judgement. Instead – and assuming a continued trajectory of change, with media
models becoming embedded in design tools, workflows, devices, and operating systems – agency
is re-distributed. The labour embedded in models, captured in their datasets and feedback loops,
14

reappears as cues, hints and nudges, residues collocated in model latent space alongside the explicit
directives of the prompt. Human expertise in turn becomes refracted through artistic collaborative
practice; technical expertise mediates lexical, social, historical, and aesthetic knowledge. It is perhaps
easier to say that the locus of media operation becomes more free-floating: now it is the machine,
now it is one human between another and the machine, now it is the machine for whom humans, as
an ensemble, appear as media.
We also note that this channel of model-driven synthetic media production is only one form of
media automation. In the 1990s, the arrival of ‘visual’ tools anticipated software, web and media
composition as a process of factory-like assembly of interconnected components. Remnants of this
imagined automation remain in the name of Microsoft’s venerable VisualStudio platform, and in
CAD, design, and game development tools. By contrast the preferred verbal modality of GPT and
similar models suggest alignment of machine outputs to human goals is something negotiated, a
practice of ‘talk-it-through’ rather than, for example, ‘snap-to-grid’. Accordingly, media models help
to automate fuzzy areas of human practice, excelling more in the manufacture of vibes than in tasks
of spatial reasoning.
And on the other hand, related to this last point, the multimodal model is a form of automation that
does not only succeed prior forms, but modifies something of the sense of automation qualitatively.
In acknowledging the implied dialectical tension in the social function of ‘assistance’ – where to assist
means also to suggest, to coordinate, and to control – it begins to recast the very historical trajectory
of automation, as the subsumption of tedious human labour to the machine. The soft-skilled tonality
of GPT that we describe earlier – sometimes obsequious, sometimes suggestive, sometimes admonitive
– exemplifies the spirit of ‘servant leadership’, one of managerialism’s recent trends. Just as agency
can be redistributed, so too subtle verbal cues are injected, to assist, excite, accede, exhort.
Like many other responses, ChatFOS is presented as ironic or post-ironic posited object (Collins
2010), where the question of what the intention is behind production relates also to one of who is
doing the producing. Other examples – the parody of off-shored infrastructure of Del Complex9, or
the strange blend of math explainer and psychological horror tale that is Non-Euclidean Therapy
for AI Trauma [Analog Archives] #SoME3 10 serve as two striking cases – point to ways machine
learning capabilities extend into aesthetic and political practices playing upon this ambivalence. Will
the Del Complex accept payment for its merchandise? Does the slow-moving psych-horror/mathcore
drama of AI Trauma actually impart intuition about technical operations in latent space? More
interesting are perhaps the signs of the experience of labour with these systems: knowledge or media
work as the calibrated management of psychosomatic stimulation and repetition, and of psycho-social
acknowledgement and feedback. If servant managerialism describes synthetic media’s dominant
tonality, it is the complementary logic of nudge psychology and behaviour change – incremental,
suggestive, invasive – that best describes what appears as its tendentious influence on knowledge
work.
Statements and Declarations
This research was supported by funding from the Australian Research Council (DP200101409, The
Geopolitics of Automation). Ned Rossiter and Brett Neilson provided valuable feedback on the
experiments and analysis.
On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.
9https://delcomplex.com/
10https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FQ9l4v7zB3I
15

All data used in this article is ‘synthetic’, generated by AI systems such as ChatGPT. The source
code and instructions for the Discord chatbot is available at https://github.com/liammagee/discord-
openai-chatbot. Due to the stochastic nature of LLM and other AI interactions, it is not possible to
replicate the exchanges and outputs of our experiments precisely.
References
Beer S (1964) Cybernetics and management. John Wiley and Sons, New York
Case JA (2013) Logistical media: fragments from radar’s prehistory. Can J of Commun 38(3),
379-396. https://doi.org/10.22230/cjc.2013v38n3a2735
Collins M (2010) Post-irony is real, and so what? https://georgetownvoice.com/2010/03/04/post-
irony-is-real-and-so-what/. Accessed 19 December 2023
Dudley H (1936) Synthesizing speech.
Bell Laboratories record 15, December:
pp.
98–102.
https://worldradiohistory.com/Archive-Bell-Laboratories-Record/30s/Bell-Laboratories-Record-
1936-12.pdf. Accessed 19 December 2023
Hokenberry M, Starosielski N, Zieger S (2021) Introduction: the logistics of media. In: Hockenberry
M, Starosielski N, Zieger S (eds), Assembly codes: the logistics of media. Duke University Press,
Durham, pp. 1–20
Ferrari F, McKelvey F (2023) Hyperproduction: a social theory of deep generative models, Distinktion:
J of Soc Theory 24:2, 338-360. https://doi.org/10.1080/1600910X.2022.2137546
Kalpokas I (2021). Problematising reality: the promises and perils of synthetic media. SN Soc Sci
1:1. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43545-020-00010-8
Kant I (2003) The critique of pure reason. Meiklejohn JMD (trans). George Bell and Sons, London
Klikauer T (2015) What is managerialism? Crit Sociol 41,7–8:1103–1119. https://doi.org/10.1177/08969205135013
Kline
RR
(2006)
Cybernetics,
management
science,
and
technology
policy:
the
emer-
gence of ‘information technology’ as a keyword, 1948-1985.
Technol & Cult 47,3:513–35.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40061170
Lane B (2006) F.O.S. The Urban Dictionary. https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=F.O.S..
Accessed 19 December 2023
Liu V, Chilton LM (2022) Design guidelines for prompt engineering text-to-image generative models.
In: Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘22).
ACM, New York, Article 384. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501825
McCulloch WS (1950) Why the mind is in the head? Dialectica 4:192-205. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1746-
8361.1950.tb01019.x
Metz C, Isaac M, Mickle T, Weise K, Roose K (2023) Sam Altman Is reinstated as OpenAI’s chief execu-
tive. New York Times, November 22, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/11/22/technology/openai-
sam-altman-returns.html. Accessed 19 December 2023
Mills M (2012) Media and prosthesis: the vocoder, the artificial larynx, and the history of signal
processing. Qui Parle? Crit Humanit Soc Sci 21,1:107–149
16

Narayan D (2022) Platform capitalism and cloud infrastructure: theorizing a hyper-scalable computing
regime. Environ Plan Econ Space 54,5:911–929. https://doi.org/10.1177/0308518X221094028
Pelton JN (2008) Vision: human-level artificial intelligence: HAL, Meet SAM. The Futurist 42,5:36
Peters JD (2008) Strange sympathies: horizons of German and American media theory. In: Kelleter
F, Stein D (eds) American Studies as Media Studies, Universitatsverlag Winter, Heidelberg, pp. 3–23
Rosenblatt F (1958) The design of an intelligent automaton. Res Trends 6,2:1-7
Rootbeer Computer (2023) Backend-GPT. Github repository. https://github.com/RootbeerComputer/backend-
GPT. Accessed 19 December 2023
Rossiter N (2015) Coded vanilla: logistical media and the determination of action. South Atl Quart
114,1:135-152. https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-2831334
Rossiter N (2021) Logistical media theory, the politics of time, and the geopolitics of automation.
In: Hockenberry M, Starosielski N, Zieger S (eds), Assembly codes: the logistics of media. Duke
University Press, Durham, pp. 132-150
Starosielski N (2015) The undersea network. Duke University Press, Durham
Swinford D (2001) Defining irrealism: scientific development and allegorical possibility. J Fantast
Arts 12,45:77–89
Story B (2019) History of speech synthesis. In: Katz W, Assmann P (eds) The Routledge Handbook
of Phonetics. Routledge, London, pp. 9–32
Toscano A (2018) The mirror of circulation: Allan Sekula and the logistical image. Soc Space
31. https://www.societyandspace.org/articles/the-mirror-of-circulation-allan-sekula-and-the-logisti-
cal-image
Vaccari C, Chadwick A (2020) Deepfakes and disinformation:
exploring the impact of syn-
thetic political video on deception, uncertainty, and trust in news.
Soc Media Soc 6,1.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305120903408
Whittaker L, Kietzmann T, Kietzmann J, Dabirian A (2020) “All around me are synthetic faces”: the
mad world of ai-generated media. IT Prof 22,5:90-99. https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2020.2985492
Winkelhaus S, Grosse EH (2020) Logistics 4.0: A systematic review towards a new logistics system.
Int J Prod Res 58(1):18–43. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1612964
Young LC (2015) Cultural techniques and logistical media: tuning German and Anglo-american
media studies. M/C J 18,2. https://doi.org/10.5204/mcj.961
17
