A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory of Very Long Contexts
Kuang-Huei Lee 1 Xinyun Chen 1 Hiroki Furuta 1 John Canny 1 Ian Fischer 1
Abstract
Current Large Language Models (LLMs) are not
only limited to some maximum context length,
but also are not able to robustly consume long
inputs. To address these limitations, we propose
ReadAgent, an LLM agent system that increases
effective context length up to 20× in our exper-
iments. Inspired by how humans interactively
read long documents, we implement ReadAgent
as a simple prompting system that uses the ad-
vanced language capabilities of LLMs to (1) de-
cide what content to store together in a memory
episode, (2) compress those memory episodes
into short episodic memories called gist memo-
ries, and (3) take actions to look up passages in the
original text if ReadAgent needs to remind itself
of relevant details to complete a task. We evalu-
ate ReadAgent against baselines using retrieval
methods, using the original long contexts, and
using the gist memories. These evaluations are
performed on three long-document reading com-
prehension tasks: QuALITY, NarrativeQA, and
QMSum. ReadAgent outperforms the baselines
on all three tasks while extending the effective
context window by 3.5 −20×.
1. Introduction
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) are
highly capable of language understanding, but the amount
of text that LLMs are able to read at one time is constrained.
Not only is there an explicit context length limitation, but
it has also been found that performance of LLMs tends
to decline with increasingly long inputs even when they
don’t actually exceed the explicit context window (Liu et al.,
2023; Shi et al., 2023). In contrast, humans can read, under-
stand, and reason over very long texts, such as a series of
Project website and demo: read-agent.github.io.
Contribu-
tion statements: Appendix A. 1Google DeepMind. Correspon-
dence to: Kuang-Huei Lee <leekh@google.com>, Ian Fischer
<iansf@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
A very very long 
text ……
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
1. Episode
Pagination
page 1
page 2
page 3
page N
[page 1] gist
[page 2] gist
(Episodic) Gist Memory
[page N] gist
2. Gisting
Q: Why did John … ?
3. Lookup
Figure 1. ReadAgent workflow.
interrelated books.
We posit that an underlying reason for this gap is inherent
in the differences in reading approaches. Typically, we
use LLMs to consume the exact given content word-by-
word and the process is relatively passive. On the other
hand, humans read and reason over long text differently.
First, the exact information tends to be forgotten quickly,
whereas the fuzzier gist information, i.e. the substance
irrespective of exact words, from past readings lasts much
longer (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995b;a; Reyna, 2012)1. Second,
human reading is an interactive process. When we need to
remind ourselves of relevant details in order to complete a
task, such as answering a question, we look them up in the
original text.
We think that using the fuzzy gist memory to capture global
context and attending to local details together enables hu-
1Fuzzy-trace theory (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995b) posits that
people form two types of memory representations about a past
event – verbatim and gist memories. Gist memories, often episodic,
are fuzzy memories of past events, whereas verbatim memories
contain details of past events. People prefer to reason with gists
rather than with verbatim memories (Reyna, 2008).
1
arXiv:2402.09727v3  [cs.CL]  22 Jul 2024

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
mans to reason over very long context efficiently, in terms
of how much information to process at once, and is also
important for comprehension. For example, if we were to
infer the intention of a fictional character’s specific action
described on a page in a novel, besides focusing on the
surrounding pages, we likely also need to understand the
overall story and the character’s personality from reading
the whole book (see Appendix D for more analysis).
Motivated by these observations, we propose ReadAgent,
an LLM agent system that handles long content inspired by
the human approach. ReadAgent is simple to implement
and can be built entirely by prompting a previously-trained
LLM. As illustrated in Figure 1, it takes three primary steps:
(1) episode pagination, where we prompt the LLM to de-
cide where to pause in reading contiguous text; the content
between pause points becomes an episode, which we refer
to as pages in this work; (2) memory gisting, where we
prompt the LLM to compress each page into a shorter gist
and associate the gist with a corresponding context (e.g.
which page the gist was from) – this gives the episodic gist
memory; (3) interactive look-up, where the LLM looks
at the given task and the complete set of gists in-context,
makes decision on what page(s) to look up, combines the
gists with these raw pages, and solves the task.
We evaluate ReadAgent by comparing against using only
the gist memory without interactive look-up, using full text
for datasets that can fit in the context window, and using
retrieval methods to look up pages. ReadAgent outperforms
all baselines across three challenging long-document com-
prehension tasks – QuALITY, NarrativeQA and QMSum
– while increasing the effective context length significantly
compared to the original LLM. On NarrativeQA Gutenberg
test set, whose average length is 71k words and whose max-
imum is 343k words, ReadAgent improves the LLM rating
(Section 4.1) by 12.97% and ROUGE-L by 31.98% over
the best retrieval baseline and increases the effective context
length by ∼20×. On QuALITY, where the articles can fit
in an 8K context window, ReadAgent outperforms using
full text with a 3.5× effective context length while saving
20.4% on the overall number of words consumed by the
LLM (Section 3.3).
Finally, in Appendix E, we adapt ReadAgent to web navi-
gation, which is a fundamentally very-long context agent
setting. We find that ReadAgent is simple to adapt to this
setting and shows promising performance.
Our primary contributions are:
• ReadAgent, our human-inspired LLM agent that gener-
ates gist memories and looks up information as needed
for solving tasks on long contexts (Section 3).
• Demonstration of significant performance advantages and
scalability through a comprehensive experimental evalu-
ation on challenging long-context benchmarks, compar-
isons against popular baselines, and analysis (Section 4).
2. Related Work
Long-Context LLMs
The most direct way to improve
LLM long-context performance is to train or fine-tune LLMs
with longer context windows (Beltagy et al., 2020; Zaheer
et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2022; Ainslie et al., 2023; Tay et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023c). Another approach is to explore
new architectures or efficient implementations of the Trans-
former (Vaswani et al., 2017) attention layers to reduce the
need of long-context fine-tuning (Chen et al., 2023b; Press
et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024; Han et al.,
2023). However, LLM performance tends to decline with in-
creasingly long inputs even when they don’t exceed the spec-
ified context length (Liu et al., 2023). LLM performance
is also shown to be sensitive to distracting information in
the context (Shi et al., 2023). Thus, the effective context
length could be shorter than the explicit limit. Our approach
is complimentary to these approaches, scaling the effective
context length of the underlying model while reducing the
amount of distracting information in context, and requiring
neither architectural changes nor training.
Retrieval
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) tech-
niques (Chen et al., 2017; Dinan et al., 2019; Lewis et al.,
2020; Izacard & Grave, 2021; Wu et al., 2022; Park et al.,
2023; Zhong et al., 2023) allow an LLM to query task-
relevant information from a large database of documents
or document pieces. Our work implements a form of re-
trieval by reasoning over a contextualized gist memory, all
with zero-shot LLM prompting. This rethinking of retrieval
directly leverages the strength and flexibility of LLM lan-
guage understanding to reason about which documents to
retrieve. Our approach is well-suited to densely-correlated
long-document pieces, such as a series of books or a con-
versation history, but the database cannot scale arbitrarily,
since the size of the gist memory is limited by the LLM’s
context length, and the gist memory’s length correlates with
the size of the database. In contrast, conventional retrieval
approaches can handle larger databsases than our approach.
In this work, we compare against retrieval systems that use
exactly the same set of documents as our approach.
LLM Agents for Long Texts
LLMs can be used as agents
to interactively handle very long texts. WebGPT (Nakano
et al., 2021) and WebShop (Yao et al., 2022) learn browsing
actions to search for the requested answer on the internet,
despite not being designed to understand long documents.
The PEARL (Sun et al., 2023) system proposes action plans
for better long-document comprehension through iterative
prompting; Yuan et al. (2020) explicitly learns RL agents for
similar purposes. Self-note (Lanchantin et al., 2023) amor-
2

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
tizes reasoning steps and interleaves intermediate notes with
the original documents to improve reasoning. Yang et al.
(2022) generates long outputs through iterative reasoning.
However, these methods cannot address long input texts
that exceed the LLM’s context length. Similar to this work,
MemWalker (Chen et al., 2023a) also reads long documents
interactively through iterative prompting. It traverses a tree
of different levels of summaries to search for task-related
information. However, the hierarchical summary structure
makes it difficult to reason over related but distant infor-
mation at the same granularity (see Appendix H for more
discussion).
3. ReadAgent
Figure 1 shows an overview of ReadAgent, which we de-
scribe in detail below. Note that the prompts presented in
this section are examples, which may need to change accord-
ing to the target task. We release the prompts for each task
on read-agent.github.io. Please also refer to Appendix F for
the prompt design details.
3.1. Gist Memory
A gist memory is an ordered collection of short gists of
chunks of text from the original long context. Building a
gist memory has two steps: pagination and memory gisting,
described in turn below.
Episode Pagination
When ReadAgent reads through a
long text, it makes decisions on what content to store to-
gether in a memory episode by choosing where to pause
reading. At each step, we provide the LLM some text that be-
gins from the previous pause point and ends when it reaches
a max words limit. We prompt the LLM to choose which
point between paragraphs would be a natural point to pause,
and then treat the content between the previous and current
pause points as an episode, which we also refer as a page.
This is episode pagination, which we implement with the
following prompt.
As shown in the prompt, possible pause points are inserted
between paragraphs as numbered tags (e.g. ⟨13⟩), making
this a multiple choice question for the LLM. We only start
inserting these numbered tags after a min words threshold
to make sure that each page has at least min words.
Example Pagination Prompt
You are given a passage that is taken from a larger text
(article, book, ...) and some numbered labels between the
paragraphs in the passage.
Numbered labels are in angle brackets. For example, if
the label number is 19, it shows as ⟨19⟩in text.
Please choose a label where it is natural to break reading.
The label can be a scene transition, the end of a dialogue,
the end of an argument, a narrative transition, etc.
Please answer with the break point label and explain.
For example, if ⟨57⟩is a good point to break, answer with
“Break point: ⟨57⟩\n Because ...”
Passage:
{...}
{PARAGRAPH 5 TEXT}
⟨5⟩
{PARAGRAPH 6 TEXT}
⟨6⟩
{PARAGRAPH 7 TEXT}
{...}
Memory Gisting
For each page, we prompt the LLM to
shorten the exact content into a gist, or summary, as follows.
Example Gisting Prompt
Please shorten the following passage.
Just give me a shortened version. DO NOT explain your
reason.
Passage:
{PAGE TEXT}
We subsequently prepend a page tag to each gist (e.g.
“⟨Page 2⟩\n{GIST CONTENT}”) to contextualize it (indi-
cate where the gist was from), and then concatenate all gists.
This gives us the gist memory. We use the word “shorten”
in the prompt to generate these summarizing gists as it tends
to help preserve the narrative flow, making it more natu-
ral to concatenate. Using the word “summarize” tended to
produce a restructured summary in our experiments.
The original page size is a key factor for how compressed the
gist is. Let’s say the smallest unit of text that we consider is
a paragraph. Intuitively, a paragraph likely has some amount
of mutual information with its neighbors. Thus, the larger
chunk of text we group together, the more duplicated in-
formation we can remove. Empirically, compressing larger
chunks of text with LLMs also tends to remove more details,
which could affect performance. We control the page size
by changing min words and max words in pagination.
This trade-off is studied in Section 4.4.
3.2. Interactive Look-Up and Response
For a given task about a long document, we want ReadAgent
to take actions to look up relevant details in the original text
in addition to using its gist memory. As the gist memories
are contextualized with page numbers, we simply prompt
the LLM to answer which page(s) it would like to look up
and read again given the specific task. In the following we
discuss two look-up strategies: looking up all pages at once
in parallel (ReadAgent-P) and sequentially looking up one
page at a time (ReadAgent-S).
3

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
ReadAgent-P
As in the following example prompt for
question-answering, typically we give it a maximum number
of pages that it can look up but also instruct it to use as
few pages as possible to avoid unnecessary computational
overhead and distracting information. The following prompt
shows parallel look-up, where the model requests multiple
pages in response to a single prompt.
Example Parallel Lookup Prompt (ReadAgent-P)
The following text is what you remember from reading
an article and a multiple choice question related to it.
You may read 1 to 5 page(s) of the article again to refresh
your memory to prepare yourself for the question.
Please respond with which page(s) you would like to read.
For example, if you only need to read Page 8, respond
with “I want to look up Page [8] to ...”; if you would like
to read Page 7 and 12, respond with “I want to look up
Page [7, 12] to ...”; if you would like to read Page 2, 3, 7,
15 and 18, respond with “I want to look up Page [2, 3, 7,
15, 18] to ...”.
DO NOT select more pages if you don’t need to.
You don’t need to answer the question yet.
Text:
{GIST MEMORY}
Question:
{QUESTION}
The selected raw pages replace the gist(s) at the correspond-
ing positions in memory, preserving the overall narrative
flow. Then we prompt the LLM again with the task and the
updated memory and ask it to solve the task (see example
prompts in Appendix F).
ReadAgent-S
We also study the sequential look-up strat-
egy, where the model requests one page at a time, up to
some maximum number of pages. In sequential look-up,
the model gets to see the previously expanded pages before
deciding which page to expand. This gives the model ac-
cess to more information than parallel look-up, so we might
expect it to perform better in some situations. However, the
larger number of interactions with the model increases the
computational cost, so sequential look-up should only be
used on tasks where it provides clear benefits.
Example Sequential Lookup Prompt (ReadAgent-S)
The following text is what you remember from reading
a meeting transcript, followed by a question about the
transcript.
You may read multiple pages of the transcript again to
refresh your memory and prepare to answer the question.
Each page that you re-read can significantly improve your
chance of answering the question correctly.
Please specify a SINGLE page you would like to read
again or say ”STOP”.
To read a page again, respond with “Page $PAGE NUM”,
replacing $PAGE NUM with the target page number.
You can only specify a SINGLE page in your response at
this time.
To stop, simply say “STOP”. DO NOT answer the ques-
tion in your response.
Text:
{GISTS WITH IN-LINE EXPANDED PAGES}
Pages re-read already (DO NOT ask to read them again):
{LIST OF PAGE NUMBERS ALREADY READ}
Question:
{QUESTION}
Specify a SINGLE page to read again, or say STOP:
3.3. Computational Trade-offs and Scalability
Episode pagination, memory gisting and interactive look-
ups require iterative inference. As we show in the following,
the additional cost is bounded linearly by a small factor,
making our approach scale well with input length.
Pagination In theory, an LLM could read a document and
directly provide the pagination in a single pass, so the mini-
mum number of words the LLM must process is the length
of the document. Our pagination algorithm splits the doc-
ument into chunks of at most max words, and then guar-
antees that at least min words are consumed at each step.
Thus, the ratio max words
min words gives an upper bound on how many
times the word length of the document the LLM must pro-
cess using our algorithm. Gisting: Memory gisting is one
additional pass of the raw input words, since each page is
gisted independently. Look-ups: Parallel look-ups are con-
ditioned on gists instead of the full text, and thus will be
much shorter than one pass of the raw input words. Each
step of a sequential look-up is similar to parallel look-ups
and the overall cost is capped with the maximum number
of look-ups allowed. Response: Finally, answering is also
similar to parallel look-ups. There is additional overhead
from the prompt templates, of course.
On the other hand, as generating gists is an one-time effort
while the look-up and response steps operate mostly on gists
that are much shorter than the original text, the one-time
effort can be amortized when the same context is reused
for multiple tasks. Thus, in such settings, ReadAgent can
reduce the overall number of tokens to process. In particular,
directly answering from the original QuALITY dev set (230
articles and 2086 questions) is 8,708,434 words consumed
by the LLM, whereas using ReadAgent with 1-page lookup
is 6,499,856 words (25.4% saving), up-to-2-page lookup is
6,933,357 words (20.4% saving), and up-to-5-page lookup
is 7,503,084 words (13.8% saving). We can expect the
savings to be more significant with higher compression rate
4

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
and more downstream tasks.
3.4. ReadAgent Variants
In Appendix G, we discuss variants of ReadAgent that can
be useful in different problem settings, including when the
target task is known prior to reading the long document. In
Appendix E, we describe adapting ReadAgent to work in
the web navigation setting.
4. Experiments
We evaluate ReadAgent’s long-document reading compre-
hension ability on three long-context question-answering
challenges: QuALITY (Pang et al., 2022), NarrativeQA
(Koˇcisk`y et al., 2018) and QMSum (Zhong et al., 2021).
Although ReadAgent does not require any model training,
we develop the proposed method on the training sets and
test on the validation, test and/or development sets to avoid
any risk of overfitting system hyperparameters.
In this work, we primarily use the instruction-tuned PaLM
2-L (Anil et al., 2023) for our experiments and evaluation.
The context length of PaLM 2-L is 8K tokens. Details of the
model can be found in Anil et al. (2023). Additionally, we
provide GPT-3.52 results in Appendix B, and experimental
results on the web navigation setting in Appendix E.
One important performance measure of the techniques con-
sidered here is the compression rate (CR). As we want
to measure the longest LLM context length that Read-
Agent requires versus full-context length, we define this
as CR ≡100 ∗(1 −
word-count(in-context text)
word-count(full-context text)) at the final re-
sponse query, where the in-context text (gists and retrieved
pages) length is the longest among all inference steps.
4.1. LLM Raters
NarrativeQA and QMSum both have one or more free-form
reference responses. They are typically evaluated using
syntactic matching metrics such as ROUGE (Lin, 2004) F-
Measure. We additionally evaluate these datasets using an
automatic LLM Rater as an alternative to human evaluation
similar to Peng et al. (2023); Chiang et al. (2023); Zheng
et al. (2023); Chiang & Lee (2023).
In our implementation, we prompt the LLM to look at the
question or instruction and compare the model’s answer
to the reference answer. The “Strict LLM Rater Prompt”
shown below is for judging whether there is an exact match,
and the “Permissive LLM Rater Prompt” is for judging
whether there is an exact match or a partial match. We apply
both prompts to all model responses. If either rater decides
there is an exact match, we count it as an exact match. If
2http://openai.com/api/
the strict rater is negative but the permissive rater detects a
partial match, we count it as a partial match. Otherwise, it’s
not a match. In the case that there are multiple reference
answers, the response is compared against each reference
answer in turn, and the highest rating is returned.
Strict LLM Rater Prompt
After reading some text, John was given the following
question about the text:
{QUESTION TEXT}
John’s answer to the question was:
{MODEL RESPONSE TEXT}
The ground truth answer was:
{REFERENCE RESPONSE TEXT}
Does John’s answer agree with the ground truth answer?
Please answer YES or NO.
Permissive LLM Rater Prompt
After reading some text, John was given the following
question about the text:
{QUESTION TEXT}
John’s answer to the question was:
{MODEL RESPONSE TEXT}
The ground truth answer was:
{REFERENCE RESPONSE TEXT}
Does John’s answer agree with the ground truth answer?
Please answer “Yes”, “Yes, partially”, or “No”. If John’s
response has any overlap with the ground truth answer,
answer “Yes, partially”. If John’s response contains the
ground truth answer, answer “Yes”. If John’s response is
more specific than the ground truth answer, answer “Yes”.
Based on these raters, we define two different scores: LLM-
Rating-1 (LR-1) is a strict evaluation score, where we count
the percentage of exact matches over all examples; LLM-
Rating-2 (LR-2) is permissive, where we count the percent-
age of exact and partial matches.
4.2. Baseline Methods
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
As discussed
in Section 2, RAG (Lewis et al., 2020) is a popular ap-
proach to extend access to a large amount of text beyond
what can fit in the LLM context window. In this paper we
compare ReadAgent to RAG baselines using conventional
retrieval methods to find relevant “pages” in a long text,
where we reuse the pages generated by ReadAgent. We
consider two relevance methods: Okapi BM25 (Robertson
et al., 2009) and neural retrieval based on the Gemini API
embedding model (models/embedding-001)3. The neural
retrieval relevance score is defined as the dot product be-
3https://ai.google.dev/models/gemini
5

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
tween the question embedding vector and each page (or gist
memory embedding vector in the case of NarrativeQA, see
Section 4.3.2). For reading comprehension tasks, the pages
are ranked by relevance to each question, and we prompt
the LLM to look at the top-k pages as context for answering
the question. In most retrieval settings, the database of doc-
uments is quite large, which makes the retrieval task more
challenging. In our setting, ReadAgent and retrieval meth-
ods all use a per-document database, rather than per-dataset.
For example, in QuALITY, there are hundreds of articles,
each with multiple questions. The database for retrieval in
each question is only the extracted pages from the corre-
sponding article (typically less than 20 pages), rather than
the thousands of pages from the entire dataset.
Full or Truncated Text Content
The maximum length of
QuALITY dev articles is ∼6,000 words, which can fit into
the PaLM 2-L context window. This allows us to evaluate
ReadAgent against directly using the full long document
for long-context reading comprehension. The maximum
length of QMSum is over 26,000 words. Consequently, we
choose to truncate the text to close to the context window
limit (6,000 words for PaLM 2-L experiments) to ensure
that the truncated text fits in the LLM’s context, though
this would generally be a weaker baseline. Finally, since
the average length of NarrativeQA documents significantly
exceeds the context window, it is less meaningful to perform
the truncated-context comparison.
Gist Memory
We can also attempt to solve the given task
by reasoning directly over the gist memory. Doing so helps
us understand not only the importance of interactive look-up
but also how using the LLM-compressed information alone
compares to the full content and retrieval baselines.
4.3. Long-Context Reading Comprehension
4.3.1. QUALITY
QuALITY (Pang et al., 2022) is a four-way multiple choice
question answering challenge with text data from several
different sources. QuALITY is evaluated using accuracy,
with 25% corresponding to chance performance.
The dev set has an average length of 4,122 words and a
maximum of 5,967. The gist memory has an average length
of 650 words and a maximum of 1,264. Figure 2 shows
the word statistics for the original text and the gists. The
compression rate of the gists is 85.53%. See Appendix C
for QuALITY pagination hyperparameters.
Table 1 shows the experimental results on QuALITY.
The performance of ReadAgent increases as we increase
the maximum number of pages allowed for look-up.
ReadAgent-P (Look up 1-6 pages) achieves 86.91% and
ReadAgent-S (Look up 1-6 pages) achieves 87.17% in ac-
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
words
0
10
20
Documents
Document Gists
Figure 2. Histogram of QuALITY document and gist word counts.
curacy. Notably, starting from ReadAgent (Look up 1-2
pages), it outperforms all baselines methods including us-
ing the full original text, which could have been an upper
bound on the performance – every other method reduces
the amount of text the LLM considers before generating
its response. However, this is not a surprising result. Prior
work shows that current LLMs are not able to effectively use
the full long context window (Liu et al., 2023), potentially
due to training data sparsity, and distracting information
can also reduce performance (Shi et al., 2023; Weston &
Sukhbaatar, 2023). The corresponding compression rate of
ReadAgent (Look up 1-2 pages) is 72.17%, meaning that
∼3.5× as many tokens can fit in the context window after
gisting.
Method
CR (# LU)
Accuracy
BM25 Retrieval
Top-1
89.27% (1)
70.34% ± 0.06
Top-2
78.96% (2)
79.05% ± 0.05
Top-3
68.50% (3)
82.65% ± 0.05
Top-4
58.57% (4)
84.42% ± 0.13
Neural Retrieval with Gemini API
Top-1
89.91% (1)
71.32% ± 0.19
Top-2
80.08% (2)
79.02% ± 0.10
Top-3
70.28% (3)
83.41% ± 0.10
Top-4
60.68% (4)
84.88% ± 0.03
Full Raw Content
0%
85.83% ± 0.19
GistMem
85.53%
77.52% ± 0.13
ReadAgent-P
Look up 1 pg
76.00% (1.0)
84.13% ± 0.10
Look up 1-2 pgs
72.17% (1.6)
86.16% ± 0.12
Look up 1-3 pgs
69.36% (2.0)
86.59% ± 0.10
Look up 1-4 pgs
67.73% (2.2)
86.86% ± 0.00
Look up 1-5 pgs
66.45% (2.3)
86.83% ± 0.10
Look up 1-6 pgs
64.75% (2.5)
86.91% ± 0.08
ReadAgent-S 1-6 pgs
58.53% (3.2)
87.17% ± 0.18
Table 1. QuALITY results on the dev set of 230 docs and 2086
questions using PaLM 2-L. CR is the compression rate. # LU is
the number of lookups. We report means and standard deviations
across 3 runs, except where inconsequential (CR and # LU).
4.3.2. NARRATIVEQA
NarrativeQA (Koˇcisk`y et al., 2018) has the longest con-
text length on average among the three reading comprehen-
sion datasets we choose. The dataset is divided into books
(Gutenberg) and move scripts. The Gutenberg test set have
70,619 words on average, and the maximum is 343,910
words; the movie scripts test set have 29,963 on average,
6

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
Gutenberg Validation (58 docs & 1743 questions)
Gutenberg Test (177 docs & 5207 questions)
Method
CR (# LU)
LR-1
LR-2
R-1
R-2
R-L
CR (# LU)
LR-1
LR-2
R-1
R-2
R-L
BM25 Retrieval
Top-1
97.63% (1)
39.01%
50.14%
0.166
0.061
0.156
97.42% (1)
43.5%
55.33%
0.176
0.065
0.165
Top-2
95.24% (2)
49.34%
60.76%
0.203
0.079
0.191
94.80% (2)
51.70%
64.53%
0.206
0.082
0.194
Top-3
93.34% (3)
52.73%
63.68%
0.208
0.080
0.195
93.02% (3)
52.97%
66.03%
0.210
0.083
0.197
Top-4
92.47% (4)
53.59%
64.26%
0.211
0.082
0.197
92.27% (4)
53.60%
66.16%
0.210
0.084
0.197
Neural Retrieval with Gemini API
Top-1
98.19% (1)
34.25%
46.53%
0.146
0.051
0.134
98.14% (1)
36.47%
47.8%
0.150
0.054
0.140
Top-2
96.30% (2)
44.69%
54.96%
0.180
0.069
0.167
96.15% (2)
44.48%
56.17%
0.182
0.070
0.170
Top-3
94.62% (3)
46.24%
57.31%
0.191
0.077
0.178
94.42% (3)
48.97%
60.73%
0.195
0.076
0.183
Top-4
93.45% (4)
48.59%
59.21%
0.196
0.079
0.184
93.25% (4)
50.62%
62.05%
0.203
0.080
0.191
GistMem
96.89%
55.31%
68.22%
0.233
0.091
0.218
96.80%
55.79%
71.19%
0.231
0.092
0.217
ReadAgent-P
Look up 1 pg
95.15% (0.94)
58.92%
71.89%
0.244
0.101
0.230
94.84% (0.93)
59.98%
73.23%
0.240
0.098
0.226
Look up 1-2 pgs
94.79% (1.23)
59.84%
72.29%
0.239
0.098
0.224
94.36% (1.34)
59.19%
72.65%
0.231
0.091
0.218
Look up 1-3 pgs
94.39% (1.50)
59.84%
71.89%
0.240
0.098
0.226
94.03% (1.61)
59.63%
72.84%
0.230
0.093
0.217
ReadAgent-S 1-2 pgs
94.35% (1.38)
57.89%
71.14%
0.239
0.097
0.225
93.86% (1.46)
60.48%
72.48%
0.232
0.095
0.219
ReadAgent-S 1-3 pgs
94.08% (1.57)
58.52%
71.49%
0.242
0.098
0.229
93.67% (1.57)
60.55%
72.79%
0.231
0.095
0.219
Movie Validation (57 docs & 1699 questions)
Movie Test (172 docs & 5139 questions)
BM25 Retrieval
Top-1
97.07% (1)
32.67%
42.61%
0.156
0.058
0.144
96.61% (1)
33.64%
43.34%
0.154
0.054
0.143
Top-2
94.12% (2)
39.97%
50.21%
0.187
0.070
0.174
93.81% (2)
42.50%
53.05%
0.191
0.072
0.178
Top-3
91.18% (3)
43.61%
53.91%
0.198
0.077
0.185
91.00% (3)
46.97%
57.52%
0.207
0.080
0.193
Top-4
88.24% (4)
46.85%
57.62%
0.210
0.084
0.198
88.19% (4)
50.18%
60.13%
0.217
0.085
0.202
Neural Retrieval with Gemini API
Top-1
97.07% (1)
32.02%
41.44%
0.153
0.053
0.142
96.67% (1)
37.24%
46.22%
0.130
0.043
0.118
Top-2
94.19% (2)
43.20%
51.38%
0.160
0.057
0.148
93.90% (2)
46.49%
54.60%
0.164
0.061
0.151
Top-3
91.29% (3)
47.56%
56.21%
0.176
0.064
0.163
91.14% (3)
50.69%
58.92%
0.186
0.071
0.172
Top-4
88.38% (4)
49.09%
59.33%
0.193
0.075
0.180
88.36% (4)
52.13%
59.41%
0.184
0.072
0.171
GistMem
92.09%
52.56%
64.39%
0.242
0.103
0.227
91.98%
54.68%
64.00%
0.248
0.105
0.234
ReadAgent-P
Look up 1 pg
89.20% (0.99)
53.38%
65.57%
0.247
0.106
0.233
89.22% (0.98)
57.68%
68.01%
0.274
0.116
0.260
Look up 1-2 pgs
87.68% (1.52)
54.62%
65.63%
0.238
0.098
0.223
88.10% (1.39)
58.24%
68.81%
0.270
0.115
0.255
Look up 1-3 pgs
86.57% (1.91)
54.91%
65.86%
0.241
0.099
0.225
86.73% (1.89)
58.82%
69.12%
0.272
0.116
0.257
ReadAgent-S 1-2 pgs
86.36% (1.98)
59.33%
68.28%
0.203
0.082
0.188
85.92% (1.98)
63.33%
72.06%
0.214
0.086
0.199
ReadAgent-S 1-3 pgs
83.56% (2.95)
59.45%
68.81%
0.210
0.087
0.195
83.18% (2.95)
64.53%
73.06%
0.217
0.090
0.202
Table 2. NarrativeQA results (PaLM 2-L). R-1, R-2, and R-L are ROUGE F-Measures. LR-1, and LR-2 are LLM-Ratings.
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
words
0
10
20
30
40
Documents
Document Gists
Figure 3. Histogram of NarrativeQA (Gutenberg) test set word
counts for the original text and the gists.
and the maximum is 63,957 words. As the reference an-
swers are free-form, we evaluate based on ROUGE (Lin,
2004) and the LLM Ratings (Section 4.1). The original
main texts are replaced with the HTML-stripped version
from SCROLLS (Shaham et al., 2022).
Because of the length of NarrativeQA articles, in order
to fit the gists into the context window, we significantly
expand the page size, resulting in stronger compression
(Section 3.1). For example, the Gutenburg gists from the test
set have 2,217 words on average and the maximum is 6,471
words, whereas the movie script gists have 2,155 words on
average and the maximum is 4,511 words. Figures 3 and 4
show the word statistics for the original text and the gists in
Gutenberg and movie scripts respectively. The compression
rate of the gists is 96.80% for Gutenberg texts and 91.98%
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
words
0
20
40
Scripts
Script Gists
Figure 4. Histogram of NarrativeQA (movie) test set word counts
for the original text and the gists.
for movie scripts. See Appendices C and I for NarrativeQA
pagination hyperparameters and more details.
For the neural retrieval models, we use the gist memory em-
bedding vectors rather than the page embedding vectors be-
cause the Gemini API embedding model is limited to 10,000
characters (or less than 2,000 tokens, in expectation), which
is too short for embedding full pages in our NarrativeQA
experiments. However, using those embedding vectors, we
then return the original pages to the LLM context as normal,
and use those pages as described in Section 4.2.
Because the Gutenberg texts and the movie scripts have
significantly different distributions, we present the results
separately in Table 2. ReadAgent again outperforms all the
baselines across all subsets of NarrativeQA.
7

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
Method
CR (# LU)
LLM Rating-1
LLM Rating-2
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
Resp. Length
BM25 Retrieval
Top-1
95.69% (1.00) 32.48% ± 1.65 63.85% ± 1.51 27.53 ± 0.23 7.00 ± 0.14 18.45 ± 0.16 48.62 ± 0.28
Top-2
91.48% (2.00) 29.41% ± 0.60 71.57% ± 1.48 28.85 ± 0.17 7.59 ± 0.08 19.34 ± 0.14 52.39 ± 0.49
Top-3
86.93% (3.00) 34.80% ± 1.14 79.53% ± 0.35 30.69 ± 0.17 8.40 ± 0.11 20.64 ± 0.13 53.59 ± 0.35
Top-4
82.55% (4.00) 35.66% ± 0.30 81.13% ± 0.35 31.10 ± 0.10 8.53 ± 0.06 20.36 ± 0.11 54.96 ± 0.42
Top-5
78.13% (5.00) 39.09% ± 0.92 84.44% ± 0.46 31.16 ± 0.14 8.52 ± 0.08 20.69 ± 0.03 54.52 ± 0.13
Top-6
73.97% (6.00) 37.87% ± 0.90 83.70% ± 0.87 31.06 ± 0.04 8.38 ± 0.06 20.43 ± 0.08 56.18 ± 0.44
Neural Retrieval with Gemini API
Top-1
95.99% (1.00) 34.80% ± 1.39 68.87% ± 0.62 27.86 ± 0.12 7.12 ± 0.04 18.76 ± 0.09 49.46 ± 0.23
Top-2
92.02% (2.00) 40.32% ± 0.92 81.50% ± 0.46 30.17 ± 0.08 8.03 ± 0.03 19.80 ± 0.08 55.48 ± 0.27
Top-3
87.93% (3.00) 40.93% ± 1.35 85.17% ± 1.25 31.36 ± 0.12 8.67 ± 0.10 20.68 ± 0.10 56.71 ± 0.27
Top-4
83.71% (4.00) 40.56% ± 0.62 84.31% ± 0.87 31.52 ± 0.11 8.59 ± 0.10 20.40 ± 0.10 56.47 ± 0.71
Top-5
79.47% (5.00) 40.20% ± 0.76 86.76% ± 0.60 31.32 ± 0.11 8.49 ± 0.11 20.49 ± 0.07 56.73 ± 0.91
Top-6
75.44% (6.00) 40.81% ± 0.52 87.01% ± 0.35 31.92 ± 0.02 8.73 ± 0.09 20.82 ± 0.05 58.39 ± 0.31
Truncated Raw Content
First 6k words
32.59% (0.00) 14.71% ± 0.79 52.45% ± 0.69 25.42 ± 0.05 4.98 ± 0.09 16.58 ± 0.10 58.42 ± 0.11
Last 6k words
32.38% (0.00) 10.42% ± 0.62 35.66% ± 2.46 20.69 ± 0.19 3.44 ± 0.10 14.13 ± 0.08 44.23 ± 0.11
GistMem
83.13% (0.00) 40.20% ± 0.96 89.83% ± 0.76 31.00 ± 0.09 7.99 ± 0.04 20.15 ± 0.08 65.75 ± 0.20
ReadAgent-P
Look up 1 pg
80.00% (0.98) 40.56% ± 0.46 89.46% ± 1.48 31.26 ± 0.09 8.22 ± 0.15 20.29 ± 0.07 63.78 ± 1.13
Look up 1-2 pgs
77.38% (1.71) 39.71% ± 1.87 89.71% ± 0.60 31.11 ± 0.04 8.01 ± 0.15 20.21 ± 0.04 64.73 ± 1.02
Look up 1-3 pgs
75.07% (2.53) 38.36% ± 1.21 89.71% ± 0.60 31.50 ± 0.29 8.15 ± 0.15 20.45 ± 0.24 63.91 ± 1.58
Look up 1-4 pgs
73.48% (3.08) 39.95% ± 1.51 90.56% ± 0.35 31.34 ± 0.05 8.08 ± 0.18 20.26 ± 0.07 63.40 ± 0.79
Look up 1-5 pgs
72.29% (3.50) 37.99% ± 0.96 87.75% ± 0.46 31.16 ± 0.10 8.06 ± 0.05 20.35 ± 0.12 65.22 ± 1.40
Look up 1-6 pgs
70.90% (3.97) 39.09% ± 2.04 88.24% ± 0.60 31.50 ± 0.30 8.05 ± 0.13 20.26 ± 0.13 66.70 ± 0.62
ReadAgent-S 1-6 pgs 70.34% (3.55) 46.57% ± 0.87 91.54% ± 0.30 32.90 ± 0.17 8.87 ± 0.23 21.15 ± 0.14 68.87 ± 0.60
Table 3. QMSum validation results (PaLM 2-L) means and standard deviations across 3 runs. 35 articles and 272 questions. CR is the
compression rate. # LU is the number of lookups. Resp. Length is the length in words of the model’s final response.
4.3.3. QMSUM
QMSum (Zhong et al., 2021) consists of meeting transcripts
on various topics and associated questions or instructions.
We use the concatenated version of QMSum provided by
SCROLLS (Shaham et al., 2022). The transcripts tend to be
quite long, ranging in length from 1,000 to 26,300 words,
with an average length of about 10,000 words. Figure 5
shows the histograms of word counts for the QMSum train-
ing set. The answers are free form text, so the standard
evaluation metric is ROUGE F-Measure. We additionally
evaluate using our LLM Ratings (Section 4.1). See Appen-
dices C and J for hyperparameters and additional results.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
words
0
2
4
6
Transcripts
Transcript gists
Figure 5. Histogram of QMSum word counts for the original tran-
scripts and the gisted transcripts. The gisted transcripts are all less
than 5,000 words, allowing them to entirely fit into the context
window of PaLM 2-L.
In Table 3 and Table 11 (Appendix), we see that perfor-
mance improves as the compression rate decreases, so tech-
niques that look up more pages tend to do better than
techniques that look up fewer pages. We also see that
ReadAgent-S substantially outperforms ReadAgent-P (and
all baselines). This performance improvement comes at
a cost of up to six times as many requests in the retrieval
phase. Since other datasets don’t have such a strong perfor-
mance improvement, we suspect that QMSum is in some
sense a more challenging dataset, requiring the model to ac-
tively search through the gisted transcript to locate relevant
information. This hypothesis seems reasonable, as meet-
ing transcripts are much less structured than the documents,
books, and movies found in QuALITY and NarrativeQA.
A large fraction of the tasks in QMSum are a request to
provide a summary, rather than a concrete question about
some content in the meeting. For many of these, the LLM
refuses to look up any pages, instead responding with “I
don’t need to look up any pages. I can summarize the whole
meeting based on what I already remember.”, for exam-
ple. Consequently, the average number of pages looked up
for ReadAgent is much lower than the maximum allowed.
However, on the tasks that actually involve a question, Read-
Agent tends to use most or all of the available lookup pages.
In Tables 3 and 11, the ROUGE scores by themselves don’t
always show a clear trend. This is because as the length of
the texts increase (corresponding to the compression rates
decreasing), the response lengths increase as well. Longer
response lengths result in lower ROUGE precision values,
8

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
which pushes down the F-Measures. Consequently, for
the ROUGE scores to increase as text length increases, the
improvement to recall must be more substantial than the
reduction to precision. This happens to some extent, but
the effect size is small. Furthermore, including gists in the
text substantially increases the response length, as is the
case for GistMem and all the ReadAgent approaches. This
increase is in spite of the fact that all models use the same
question-answering prompt, so there is no prompt difference
to cause the increased response lengths. This makes it much
more challenging for GistMem and ReadAgent to outper-
form the retrieval methods in ROUGE score. Nevertheless,
ReadAgent-S manages to have the highest ROUGE scores
as well as the highest LLM ratings. Because of these issues
with ROUGE, we consider the LLM ratings to be more in-
formative for comparisons between these runs. However,
the LLM ratings do not make it easy to compare with results
using a different LLM to rate, such as GPT, and they also
do not allow for easy comparisons with other works. The
same observation applies to the NarrativeQA results above.
4.4. Ablation Study and Analysis
Retrieval Quality
In Table 4, we compare using GistMem
with neural retrieval to look up one page with using Read-
Agent to look up one page. This is equivalent to replacing
ReadAgent’s prompt-based retrieval with neural retrieval.
ReadAgent’s retrieval performs better here.
Method
Accuracy
GistMem + Neural Retrieval Top-1
82.65%
ReadAgent-P (Look up 1 pg)
84.13%
Table 4. ReadAgent retrieval vs. GistMem with neural retrieval.
Episode pagination
In this work we ask ReadAgent to
decide where to pause reading and what information to store
together in memory (Section 3.1), whereas in prior art, rule-
based segmentation of text is typically used (Chen et al.,
2023a; Wu et al., 2021). We compare the two approaches
with similar page length on average in Table 5 to demon-
strate that it is indeed beneficial to break at pause points
that LLMs consider natural (e.g. scene transitions, ends of
dialogue, narrative transitions, etc).
LLM
Uniform Length
ReadAgent-P (1-5 pgs) Acc.
86.83%
85.71%
Table 5. ReadAgent accuracy on QuALITY with episode pagina-
tion based on LLM (PaLM 2-L) vs. uniform length pagination.
The compression trade-off
Table 6 presents the empirical
results of compression rate increasing as page size increases.
As the compression rate decreases, the gists are more useful
for answering questions directly. However, for ReadAgent
with look-ups, when the initial gist compression rate gets
too high, accuracy suffers.
GistMem
ReadAgent-P (1-5 pgs)
max words
CR
Acc
CR
Acc
400
81.81%
78.91%
66.71%
86.82%
600
85.53%
77.52%
66.45%
86.83%
800
88.12%
76.22%
65.06%
86.34%
1200
91.38%
73.97%
61.77%
85.67%
Table 6. Compression rate increases as the maximum number of
words allowed per page increases on QuALITY. Our default setting
of min/max words is 280/600. In the other three experiments, we
scale min words proportionally with max words.
5. Conclusion
We have presented ReadAgent, a simple interactive prompt-
ing system to mitigate the context length and context use
limitations of current LLMs. ReadAgent outperforms other
strong zero-shot (i.e., not trained or finetuned on the training
set) baselines across standard performance metrics. These
results demonstrate that LLMs are capable of generating
compressed textual representations of long contexts that are
useful for tasks that humans think are important, even with-
out knowing those tasks ahead of time. They also demon-
strate that LLMs are capable of reasoning interactively over
such compressed representations, using them to decide what
information needs to be retrieved to effectively perform
a known task. ReadAgent increases the effective context
length by up to 20× while outperforming conventional re-
trieval techniques. However, it does not give infinite context
lengths, nor does it guarantee good performance when the
gist memory itself is extremely long. Future work will need
to address these fundamental limitations in LLMs.
Impact Statement
As ReadAgent is built atop LLMs, it naturally inherits their
impacts and risks. It also makes it possible to attempt to
solve new problems that current LLMs cannot tackle, due
to context length limitations. It is possible that ReadAgent
could cause greater harms as a consequence, just as it could
improve things, depending on how it is used. One risk that
we were not able to study, but that seems particularly plausi-
ble, is of an increased tendency of the LLM to hallucinate
when working with gist memories rather than full text. Since
many details are elided in the gist memories, if the model is
called upon to perform some task that requires those details,
it may generate them itself without giving any indication
that is the case.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Sergey Ioffe, Rif A. Saurous, Yujin Tang,
Sergio Guadarrama, Daliang Li, Felix Yu, and Rob Fergus
for valuable feedback and discussion.
9

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
References
Ainslie, J., Lei, T., de Jong, M., Onta˜n´on, S., Brahma, S.,
Zemlyanskiy, Y., Uthus, D., Guo, M., Lee-Thorp, J., Tay,
Y., Sung, Y.-H., and Sanghai, S. Colt5: Faster long-range
transformers with conditional computation, 2023.
Anil, R., Dai, A. M., Firat, O., Johnson, M., Lepikhin,
D., Passos, A., Shakeri, S., Taropa, E., Bailey, P., Chen,
Z., et al.
Palm 2 technical report.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
Beltagy, I., Peters, M. E., and Cohan, A. Longformer: The
long-document transformer, 2020.
Chen, D., Fisch, A., Weston, J., and Bordes, A. Reading
wikipedia to answer open-domain questions, 2017.
Chen, H., Pasunuru, R., Weston, J., and Celikyilmaz,
A.
Walking down the memory maze: Beyond con-
text limit through interactive reading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.05029, 2023a.
Chen, S., Wong, S., Chen, L., and Tian, Y. Extending
context window of large language models via positional
interpolation, 2023b.
Chen, Y., Qian, S., Tang, H., Lai, X., Liu, Z., Han, S., and
Jia, J. Longlora: Efficient fine-tuning of long-context
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12307,
2023c.
Chiang, C.-H. and Lee, H.-y. Can large language models be
an alternative to human evaluations? In Rogers, A., Boyd-
Graber, J., and Okazaki, N. (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 15607–15631,
Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.870.
Chiang, W.-L., Li, Z., Lin, Z., Sheng, Y., Wu, Z., Zhang,
H., Zheng, L., Zhuang, S., Zhuang, Y., Gonzalez, J. E.,
Stoica, I., and Xing, E. P. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023.
Deng, X., Gu, Y., Zheng, B., Chen, S., Stevens, S., Wang,
B., Sun, H., and Su, Y. Mind2web: Towards a generalist
agent for the web.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06070,
2023.
Dinan, E., Roller, S., Shuster, K., Fan, A., Auli, M., and
Weston, J. Wizard of wikipedia: Knowledge-powered
conversational agents, 2019.
Furuta, H., Matsuo, Y., Faust, A., and Gur, I. Language
model agents suffer from compositional generalization in
web automation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18751, 2023.
Furuta, H., Lee, K.-H., Nachum, O., Matsuo, Y., Faust, A.,
Gu, S. S., and Gur, I. Multimodal web navigation with
instruction-finetuned foundation models. In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=efFmBWioSc.
Guo, M., Ainslie, J., Uthus, D., Ontanon, S., Ni, J.,
Sung, Y.-H., and Yang, Y. LongT5: Efficient text-to-
text transformer for long sequences.
In Carpuat, M.,
de Marneffe, M.-C., and Meza Ruiz, I. V. (eds.), Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
NAACL 2022, pp. 724–736, Seattle, United States, July
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2022.findings-naacl.55.
Gur, I., Furuta, H., Huang, A., Safdari, M., Matsuo, Y., Eck,
D., and Faust, A. A real-world webagent with planning,
long context understanding, and program synthesis. arXiv
preprint arxiv:2307.12856, 2023.
Han, C., Wang, Q., Xiong, W., Chen, Y., Ji, H., and Wang, S.
Lm-infinite: Simple on-the-fly length generalization for
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16137,
2023.
He, P., Liu, X., Gao, J., and Chen, W. Deberta: Decoding-
enhanced bert with disentangled attention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.03654, 2020.
Izacard, G. and Grave, E. Leveraging passage retrieval with
generative models for open domain question answering,
2021.
Jin, H., Han, X., Yang, J., Jiang, Z., Liu, Z., Chang, C.-
Y., Chen, H., and Hu, X.
Llm maybe longlm: Self-
extend llm context window without tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.01325, 2024.
Kim, G., Baldi, P., and McAleer, S. Language models can
solve computer tasks. arXiv preprint arxiv:2303.17491,
2023.
Koˇcisk`y, T., Schwarz, J., Blunsom, P., Dyer, C., Hermann,
K. M., Melis, G., and Grefenstette, E. The narrativeqa
reading comprehension challenge. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 6:317–328,
2018.
Lanchantin, J., Toshniwal, S., Weston, J., Szlam, A., and
Sukhbaatar, S. Learning to reason and memorize with
self-notes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00833, 2023.
Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V.,
Goyal, N., K¨uttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt¨aschel,
T., et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive NLP tasks. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020.
10

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
Lin, C.-Y. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of
summaries. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop: Text
Summarization Branches Out 2004, pp. 10, 01 2004.
Liu, N. F., Lin, K., Hewitt, J., Paranjape, A., Bevilac-
qua, M., Petroni, F., and Liang, P. Lost in the middle:
How language models use long contexts. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.03172, 2023.
Nakano, R., Hilton, J., Balaji, S., Wu, J., Ouyang, L., Kim,
C., Hesse, C., Jain, S., Kosaraju, V., Saunders, W., et al.
Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with hu-
man feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Pang, R. Y., Parrish, A., Joshi, N., Nangia, N., Phang, J.,
Chen, A., Padmakumar, V., Ma, J., Thompson, J., He, H.,
et al. Quality: Question answering with long input texts,
yes! In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5336–
5358, 2022.
Park, J. S., O’Brien, J., Cai, C. J., Morris, M. R., Liang,
P., and Bernstein, M. S. Generative agents: Interactive
simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Peng, B., Li, C., He, P., Galley, M., and Gao, J. Instruc-
tion tuning with gpt-4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03277,
2023.
Press, O., Smith, N., and Lewis, M. Train short, test long:
Attention with linear biases enables input length extrapo-
lation. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2022.
Reyna, V. and Brainerd, C.
Fuzzy-trace theory: Some
foundational issues. Learning and Individual differences,
7(2):145–162, 1995a.
Reyna, V. F. A theory of medical decision making and
health: fuzzy trace theory. Medical decision making, 28
(6):850–865, 2008.
Reyna, V. F. A new intuitionism: Meaning, memory, and de-
velopment in fuzzy-trace theory. Judgment and Decision
making, 7(3):332–359, 2012.
Reyna, V. F. and Brainerd, C. J. Fuzzy-trace theory: An
interim synthesis. Learning and individual Differences, 7
(1):1–75, 1995b.
Robertson, S., Zaragoza, H., et al. The probabilistic rele-
vance framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations and
Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4):333–389, 2009.
Shaham, U., Segal, E., Ivgi, M., Efrat, A., Yoran, O., Haviv,
A., Gupta, A., Xiong, W., Geva, M., Berant, J., et al.
Scrolls: Standardized comparison over long language
sequences. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
12007–12021, 2022.
Shi, F., Chen, X., Misra, K., Scales, N., Dohan, D., Chi,
E. H., Sch¨arli, N., and Zhou, D. Large language models
can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 31210–
31227. PMLR, 2023.
Shi, T., Karpathy, A., Fan, L., Hernandez, J., and Liang,
P. World of bits: An open-domain platform for web-
based agents. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2017.
Sun, S., Liu, Y., Wang, S., Zhu, C., and Iyyer, M.
Pearl: Prompting large language models to plan and
execute actions over long documents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14564, 2023.
Tay, Y., Dehghani, M., Bahri, D., and Metzler, D. Efficient
transformers: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(6), dec
2022. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3530811. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3530811.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L. u., and Polosukhin, I. At-
tention is all you need. In Guyon, I., Luxburg, U. V.,
Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S.,
and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2017.
Weston, J. and Sukhbaatar, S.
System 2 attention
(is something you might need too).
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.11829, 2023.
Wu, J., Ouyang, L., Ziegler, D. M., Stiennon, N., Lowe,
R., Leike, J., and Christiano, P. Recursively summa-
rizing books with human feedback.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.10862, 2021.
Wu, Y., Rabe, M. N., Hutchins, D., and Szegedy, C.
Memorizing transformers. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://
openreview.net/forum?id=TrjbxzRcnf-.
Xiao, G., Tian, Y., Chen, B., Han, S., and Lewis, M. Ef-
ficient streaming language models with attention sinks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.
Yang, C., Wang, X., Lu, Y., Liu, H., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., and
Chen, X. Large language models as optimizers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.03409, 2023.
11

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
Yang, K., Tian, Y., Peng, N., and Klein, D. Re3: Generating
longer stories with recursive reprompting and revision. In
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4393–4479,
2022.
Yao, S., Chen, H., Yang, J., and Narasimhan, K. Web-
shop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with
grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 35:20744–20757, 2022.
Yuan, X., Fu, J., Cˆot´e, M.-A., Tay, Y., Pal, C., and Trischler,
A. Interactive machine comprehension with information
seeking agents. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
2325–2338, 2020.
Zaheer, M., Guruganesh, G., Dubey, K. A., Ainslie, J., Al-
berti, C., Ontanon, S., Pham, P., Ravula, A., Wang, Q.,
Yang, L., and Ahmed, A. Big bird: Transformers for
longer sequences. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Had-
sell, R., Balcan, M., and Lin, H. (eds.), Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
17283–17297. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z.,
Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E., Zhang, H.,
Gonzalez, J. E., and Stoica, I. Judging LLM-as-a-judge
with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.
Zhong, M., Yin, D., Yu, T., Zaidi, A., Mutuma, M., Jha, R.,
Hassan, A., Celikyilmaz, A., Liu, Y., Qiu, X., et al. Qm-
sum: A new benchmark for query-based multi-domain
meeting summarization. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pp. 5905–5921, 2021.
Zhong, W., Guo, L., Gao, Q., and Wang, Y. Memorybank:
Enhancing large language models with long-term mem-
ory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10250, 2023.
12

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
A. Author Contributions
Kuang-Huei Lee developed the initial working prototype, the method and the experiments on QuALITY and NarrativeQA,
was a main writer of the manuscript, and led the project overall.
Xinyun Chen developed the method, the LLM rater, and experiments on NarrativeQA, and significantly contributed to
manuscript writing.
Hiroki Furuta developed the web navigation experiments, and significantly contributed to manuscript writing.
John Canny contributed in the initial conceptualization, advised the project, and helped with manuscript editing.
Ian Fischer co-proposed the core idea, developed the method and experiments on QMSum, and was a main writer of the
manuscript.
B. Evaluation with GPT-3.5
Table 7 shows the results of running experiments using exactly the same setup as described in Section 4.3.1, but using
GPT 3.5 Turbo rather than PaLM 2-L. GPT 3.5 Turbo has a context length of over 16,000 tokens, so the QuALITY dataset
easily fits into context. We don’t specifically tune prompts for GPT 3.5 Turbo, but instead use the same prompts that we
use for PaLM 2-L. GPT 3.5 Turbo has a much harder time with this task than PaLM 2-L, but the same general trends hold.
Neural Retrieval is weaker than ReadAgent. ReadAgent-S achieves comparable performance to using the full article content.
The gap between ReadAgent-P and ReadAgent-S appears to be larger using this model, but we found that ReadAgent-P is
very restrictive of how many pages to look up (1.0 in average) even though we allow up to 5. We think that this can likely
be remedied if we engineer the prompt for GPT 3.5 Turbo. Nonetheless, comparing to using top 3 from neural retrieval,
ReadAgent-P still yields better accuracy and compression rate.
Method
CR (# LU)
Accuracy
Neural Retrieval with Gemini API Top-3
73.13% (3)
69.22%
Full Raw Content
0%
73.30%
GistMem
84.24%
66.06%
ReadAgent-P Look up 1-5 pgs
76.60% (1.0)
69.65%
ReadAgent-S Look up 1-6 pgs
60.43% (3.4)
72.10%
Table 7. QuALITY results on the dev set of 230 docs and 2086 questions using GPT-3.5-turbo. CR is the compression rate. # LU is the
number of lookups. We report 1 run for each experiment for cost considerations.
C. Pagination Hyperparameters
Pagination Details
As described in Section 3.1, max words and min words are two episode pagination hyperparame-
ters. Table 8 gives their values for each of the experiments in Section 4.
Dataset
max words
min words
QuALITY
600
280
QMSum
600
280
NarrativeQA Gutenberg
3000
500
NarrativeQA movie scripts
1000
600
Table 8. Pagination hyperparameters.
13

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
D. Case Study
In this section, we analyze reading comprehension examples to demonstrate where the ability to simultaneously think over
long-range global context and focus on local information is important. We selected the short story “off course” by Mack
Reynolds4 because it is extremely short (2,712 words) and it is only broken into 8 pages, yet even so, neural retrieval using 4
pages gets three questions wrong that ReadAgent correctly answers. For this story, ReadAgent answers 6 of 8 questions
correctly. Neural retrieval answers 3 of 8 correctly, and doesn’t get either question correct that ReadAgent misses. Note that
in all three examples, ReadAgent only chooses to select two pages, even though it is also permitted to select up to 4. This
flexibility is another advantage that ReadAgent has over standard retrieval systems.
“off course” Gist Memory
⟨P0⟩Patrolmen Dermott and Casey encounter Dameri Tass, an alien who has landed on Earth. Dameri attempts to communicate
with them using a device that translates his thoughts into English.
⟨P1⟩The alien Dameri Tass used a helmet to learn English from Tim Casey, an Irish patrolman. He then became fascinated by a
horse and wanted to use the helmet on the animal. Patrolman Dermott felt like he was in a shaggy dog story.
⟨P2⟩A helicopter arrived, interrupting the horse’s inspection. Two Army officers exited and ordered a police cordon around the
spacecraft. The alien spoke, surprising the general. More police and military personnel arrived.
⟨P3⟩Dameri Tass, an alien visitor, was whisked away to Washington and held incommunicado for several days. His arrival
caused a global furor. Officials worried about the potential impact of his message on society. Eventually, the UN demanded that
he be allowed to speak before the Assembly. The White House agreed and a date was set.
⟨P4⟩The world eagerly awaited a message from space. Dameri Tass, an envoy from a super-civilization, was expected to guide
the world. Most people were ready to be guided, but some were not. The U.N. Secretary-General was nervous about introducing
the envoy, as they knew very little about him. He had been asleep for most of his time on Earth and had only recently woken up.
He spent his time playing with a dog, cat, and mouse. The Secretary-General was worried about what the envoy would say.
⟨P5⟩Dameri Tass, an alien, is brought to Earth and mistaken for an envoy from another planet. He reveals he is just a collector
for a zoo.
⟨P6⟩Dameri Tass, an alien, mistakenly landed on Earth. He addressed a large crowd, criticizing their weapons, wars, and lack of
a planet-wide government. He then left, refusing to take any Earth creatures with him, but expressing interest in horses.
⟨P7⟩The others watched as the first visitor from space hurriedly left Earth.
Page #
Starting sentence in text
0
Shure and begorra...
1
The alien stooped down...
2
Interest in the horse was ended...
3
“Sure, and it’s quite a reception”...
4
Excitement, anticipation...
5
“Here he comes,”...
6
He straightened and started off...
7
The others drew back...
Table 9. Pagination for “off course”.
Distracting retrieval
The first question gives an example of retrieval
of distracting pages and the lack of global context provided by the gist
memory causing the LLM to select the incorrect answer when using neural
retrieval, even though it had also retrieved the pages that should have led
to the correct answer. We provide the gist memory below and the story’s
pagination in Table 9.
“off course” Question 1
What was Dameri’s purpose in landing on earth?
(A) He wanted to witness an uncivilized planet and share knowledge
(B) His spaceship needed to land for repairs
(C) He heard reports that Earth had interesting animal specimens for his
collection
(D) He arrived on accident while exploring planets in the Galactic League
The correct answer is (D). ReadAgent chose (D). Neural retrieval chose
(C).
For the question above, ReadAgent looked up pages 5 and 6. Neural retrieval looked up pages 3, 4, 5, and 6. Pages 4 and 5
both make prominent mention of animals, and Page 5 explicitly mentions that the alien is a collector for a zoo, so answer (C)
seems reasonable based on the information on those pages. However, Pages 5 and 6, together with the global context from
the gist memory, make it clear that (D) is the correct answer. Since neural retrieval provided both of those pages, the lack of
the global context combined with the additional distractor pages led the LLM astray.
4Available at http://aleph.gutenberg.org/3/0/0/3/30035//30035-h//30035-h.htm.
14

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
“off course” Question 2
What happened to Dameri while he was in custody of the government?
(A) He picked up an accent from the guards
(B) He slept almost the entire time
(C) He learned horses were creatures that could be ridden
(D) He was too shy to speak
The correct answer is (B). ReadAgent chose (B). Neural retrieval chose (A).
Incorrect retrieval
The same story provides two examples of the consequences of incorrect retrieval, and the benefits of
the gist memory. For the question above, ReadAgent looked up pages 3 and 4. Neural retrieval looked up pages 0, 1, 3, and
6. The correct answer is clearly stated on Page 4, and also clearly stated in the gist of Page 4. If the LLM had access to
either of those, it should have been able to answer correctly. Instead, it was undoubtedly confused by Pages 0 and 1, where
the alien learns an accent from one of the police officers in the initial encounter.
“off course” Question 3
How did Dameri Tass communicate in English?
(A) He could communicate telepathically
(B) He never was able to communicate in English
(C) He used a handheld translation device
(D) He acquired the knowledge from a human
The correct answer is (D). ReadAgent chose (D). Neural retrieval chose (C).
For the question above, ReadAgent looked up pages 0 and 1. Neural retrieval looked up pages 0, 3, 4, and 6. The critical
information was in Page 1, although Page 0 was also relevant. The remaining pages were only relevant in that they
demonstrated that (B) was incorrect. Again, the gist memory was sufficient to answer the question correctly, in addition to
providing clear signal about what pages are relevant to the question. But neural retrieval’s selection of Page 0 without Page 1
made (C) seem plausible, as Page 0 discusses a device that the alien was clearly trying to use for communication.
E. ReadAgent for Web Navigation
We made an attempt to extend ReadAgent to decision making tasks. In particular, we apply ReadAgent for autonomous
web navigation (Shi et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2023; Furuta et al., 2024), where the goal is to autonomously control browsers
or computer interfaces to complete tasks with natural language instructions provided by users. Such instruction would be
something like Book an appointment for applying new passport for one adult, Ellen Walker, with phone number 123-456-
7890 and email address EW@gmail.com on April 4, 2023 at 1 pm in the post office nearest to zip code 60505. Don’t send
updates via text message). Example web agent actions include click, type, and select (e.g. click, type nearest post office,
select April 4, 2023). Because real-world websites can have very long HTML, LLM web agents often struggle with context
length if it operates on raw content (Gur et al., 2023).
E.1. Implementation
Pagination
For HTML, we leverage the explicit HTML DOM tree structure, decomposing the HTML into snippets with
elements at a target depth and their descendants. We test the depth from 5 to 7 and choose the best. We use these snippets as
the “pages” instead of asking the LLM to paginate.
Memory Gisting
Similar to ReadAgent for reading comprehension, we prompt the LLM to summarize snippets into
gists zero-shot, and subsequently concatenate the gists. We contextualize the gists with snippet index number in a python
dictionary-format (e.g. {“index”: ..., “content”: ...}).
Interactive Look-up
In the interactive look-up step, the LLM looks at a given task instruction, previous action history, and
the gists to decide which original HTML snippets it wants to look up. We experimented with parallel look-up (ReadAgent-P)
in the web navigation setting for faster experiments. Finally, to predict next-step actions, the LLM reads the retrieved
snippets again and predicts the target element id to interact with, the type of action operation (click, type or select), and the
input value (if any).
15

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
E.2. Mind2Web
We evaluate ReadAgent for Web Navigation on the Mind2Web (Deng et al., 2023) dataset, a real-world planning and web
action prediction benchmark, consisting of 2K instructions and episodes collected from 137 websites. The agent’s task is to
predict the next-step action (click, type and select) given HTML, task instruction, and previous action history. Mind2Web has
three test set splits: cross-task (252 tasks from 69 websites), cross-website (177 tasks from 10 websites), and cross-domain
(912 tasks from 73 websites), which was originally designed for different testing different type of generalization. However,
since our approach is zero-shot without training, these splits do not serve their original purposes.
Baselines
MindAct from the Mind2Web paper (Deng et al., 2023) first uses a DeBERTa-base (He et al., 2020) model
trained for task-relevant element retrieval to get the top 50 relevant elements. Instead of directly predicting target element id
(part of an action), it formulates this task as iterative multi-choice question-answering with target element ids sampled from
the top 50 and uses the LLM to solve it for performance purpose (see Deng et al. (2023) for details). The same LLM also
predicts the type of action and an optional value. MindAct (GPT-4) results are the state-of-the-art. We additional generate
MindAct results with PaLM 2-L as a reference.
Following the reading comprehension experiments (Section 4), we also compare with using full raw HTML, retrieval with
BM25, neural retrieval with Gemini API embedding model (models/embedding-001), and using the gists without look-up,
which, like ReadAgent, are not trained for web navigation tasks. We ask the LLM to directly predict that target element id
as it is a simpler and more tractable implementation in our setting.
Cross-Task
Cross-Website
Cross-Domain
CR
Ele. Acc
Op. F1
Step SR
SR
CR
Ele. Acc
Op. F1
Step SR
SR
CR
Ele. Acc
Op. F1
Step SR
SR
Using supervisedly trained RankLM
MindAct (GPT-3.5 + Rank LM∗)
–
20.3
56.6
17.4
0.8
–
19.3
48.8
16.2
0.6
–
21.6
52.8
18.6
1.0
MindAct (GPT-4 + Rank LM∗)
–
41.6
60.6
36.2
2.0
–
35.8
51.1
30.1
2.0
–
37.1
46.5
26.4
2.0
MindAct (PaLM 2-L + Rank LM∗)
–
29.8
61.9
24.4
1.2
–
28.8
59.6
21.6
0.6
–
29.9
60.4
24.5
1.3
No training
(PaLM 2-L)
+Raw HTML
0.0
22.1
76.7
19.2
1.2
0.0
22.2
72.3
18.2
1.7
0.0
23.6
75.6
20.9
1.0
+BM25 Retrieval (Top-1)
43.7
16.3
61.7
14.2
0.4
49.7
17.8
60.8
15.2
0.0
51.6
17.3
60.4
15.9
0.0
+BM25 Retrieval (Top-5)
19.5
25.9
70.4
22.4
2.0
17.6
29.5
71.8
23.1
1.7
19.2
27.6
71.1
24.4
1.0
+Neural Retrieval (Top-1)
74.4
14.6
55.5
11.7
0.4
87.9
18.0
55.8
14.0
0.0
82.8
16.4
60.3
14.2
0.1
+Neural Retrieval (Top-5)
32.4
26.4
71.9
22.6
0.8
37.2
26.7
69.1
22.3
2.8
38.1
30.0
72.5
26.9
1.2
GistMem
84.4
11.7
43.1
9.5
0.0
82.5
11.7
43.6
8.4
0.0
83.0
13.4
49.6
11.7
0.5
ReadAgent-P: Lookup 1 snippet
55.1
31.1
70.1
26.8
2.0
54.1
34.5
74.1
28.2
2.3
55.2
36.1
75.6
33.0
2.0
ReadAgent-P: Lookup 1-5 snippets
35.9
33.7
72.5
29.2
2.8
35.6
37.4
75.1
31.1
3.4
48.2
37.2
76.3
33.4
2.3
∆(Raw −ReadAgent)
–
+11.6
-4.2
+10.0
+1.6
–
+15.2
+2.8
+12.9
+1.7
–
+13.6
+0.7
+12.5
+1.3
∆(MindAct −ReadAgent)
–
+3.9
+10.6
+4.8
+1.6
–
+8.6
+15.5
+9.5
+2.8
–
+7.3
+15.9
+8.9
+1.0
Table 10. Web navigation performance on Mind2Web (Deng et al., 2023). ∗marks models that are trained supervisedly for the web
domain. GistMem and ReadAgent results are all also based on PaLM 2-L. We evaluate the performance in element accuracy (Ele. Acc),
operation F1 (Op. F1), step success rate (Step SR), and episode success rate (SR). We also measure the compression rate (CR). The best
performance across all the baselines is bolded, and the best across the approaches using PaLM 2-L is underlined. ReadAgent achieves
consistently better performance than using raw HTML inputs (PaLM 2-L), retrieval methods, and MindAct (PaLM 2-L) with a trained
Rank LM for HTML snippet retrieval.
E.3. Results
As shown in Table 10, ReadAgent achieves strong performance compared to the baselines. In particular, the results are
even better than MindAct (PaLM 2-L), which uses the supervisedly learned Rank LM, despite ReadAgent not using models
trained on the web navigation domain. Prior work shows that state-of-the-art LLMs alone are generally still weaker than the
approaches using models specifically trained for the web navigation domain (Furuta et al., 2023).
Figure 6 shows that gisting effectively reduces the number input tokens. Most of the input gists require less than 8K tokens.
For example, 97.4% of gisted inputs in cross-website split fits into the 8k context length, while only 51.5% of raw HTML can
fit in the context window. The inputs are truncated for the parts that exceed the context length limit, which can significantly
impact performance.
The results in Figure 6 and Table 10 indicate that even using the gist memory and ReadAgent retrieval causes truncation on
many web pages. This is because the retrieved snippets are quite large, causing the compression rate to drop substantially. In
spite of those issues, the ReadAgent results give real gains over using the full context. This indicates that even the truncated
gists and retrieved pages are more informative than the truncated raw HTML when using an LLM with a small context
16

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
length.
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
# of tokens
0
200
400
600
800
Frequency
8K
16K
Raw
Gist
Threshold
Raw
Gist
4096 Tokens
14.2%
88.6%
8192 Tokens
51.5%
97.4%
16384 Tokens
79.1%
100%
50th Percentile Tokens
8018
989
90th Percentile Tokens
25337
3596
95th Percentile Tokens
35779
5741
99th Percentile Tokens
55642
12569
Figure 6. (Left) Histogram of raw HTML and gist tokens in the Mind2Web cross-website split. Most of the input gists require fewer than
8K tokens. (Right) Statistics of token counts of raw HTML and gists.
F. Prompt Design
We discuss our prompt design in this section to clarify some of our design decisions. In most cases, the exact phrasing of the
prompt has negligible impacts on the outcome. For example, saying ”You don’t need to answer the question yet.” versus
”DO NOT answer the question in your response.” in the look-up prompts did not lead to significant differences in the results
and they can be used interchangeably.
The exact prompts that we use for each dataset can be found on https://read-agent.github.io/.
Pagination Prompt
In the QuALITY and QMSum experiments where the target page length is short and the max words
threshold is low, we tried including the previous page in the pagination prompt (Section 3.1), as we thought it could be
helpful to have more surrounding context. However, it appears that it only benefits our QMSum experiments, compared to
not including the previous page. We will leave this to future studies.
Look-up Prompt
On QuALITY, we found adding ”Take a deep breath and tell me: Which page(s) would you like to read
again?” at the end of the look-up prompt improves response quality, when using PaLM 2-L and GPT-3.5. This is similar to
what Yang et al. (2023) found.
Response Prompt
For tasks that have free-form answers (QMSum and NarrativeQA), we explicitly ask the model to
provide short and concise answers as follows. This helps mitigate the problem of verbose answers hurting ROUGE scores as
we noted in Section 4.3.3.
Example Response Prompt for Free-form Answers
{GISTS AND EXPANDED PAGES}
Question: {QUESTION}
Answer the question based on the above passage and retrieved pages. Your answer should be short and concise.
For multiple-choice questions, we query with the following prompt and parse the response to extract the model choice.
Example Response Prompt for Multiple-Choice Questions
Read the following article and answer a multiple choice question. For example, if (C) is correct, answer with “Answer: (C) ...“
Article: {GISTS AND EXPANDED PAGES}
Question: {QUESTION} {OPTIONS}
LLM Rater Prompts
In Section 4.1, we introduce Strict LLM Rater Prompt for exact matches and Permissive LLM
Rater Prompt for partial matches. The main reason for this design is that measuring exact matches can be overly strict as it
disqualifies model answers with additional details. For example, assuming the reference answer is “the British” and the
model answer is “the British army” (correct but with more details), using LLMs with “Strict LLM Rater Prompt” will tell us
that this is not an exact match. Empirically, we found these LLM ratings aligning well with our own judgements.
17

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
When referring to model’s responses in the LLM rater prompts, we choose to refer them with “John’s answer to the question
was:“ because we want to prompt the LLM to judge whether the model-generated answer matches with the reference answer
from a more objective, third-person view. Prior work, such as (Zheng et al., 2023), uses “Assistant” to refer to responses
from different model calls. Here we instead choose a common name (John) that appears to be more natural.
G. ReadAgent Variants
G.1. Unconditional and Conditional ReadAgent
When working with a long text, it is possible that the user will know ahead of time what task is to be solved. In that case,
conceivably the gisting step could include the task description in the prompt. In so doing, it is easy to imagine that the LLM
could do a better job of compressing out information that is irrelevant to the task, thereby improving efficiency and reducing
distraction. This approach would be Conditional ReadAgent. However, more generally, the task may not be known while
preparing the gists, or it may be known that the gists need to be used for multiple different tasks, such as answering many
questions about the text. Thus, by excluding the task in the gisting step, the LLM may produce more broadly useful gists, at
the cost of reduced compression and increased distracting information. This setting would be Unconditional ReadAgent.
We only explore the unconditional setting in this work, but we note that the conditional setting may be preferred in some
situations.
G.2. ReadAgent for Specific Domains
Related to Appendix G.1, when applying ReadAgent to specific domains, it might be helpful to provide domain-specific
instructions. For example, if we apply ReadAgent to understanding a programming library, it could be useful to provide more
specific instruction to LLMs to extract abstract descriptions of things like purpose of the code, functionalities, important
signatures of functions or classes from each file as gists.
G.3. Iterative Gisting
For a very long event history, such as a conversation, we may consider further compression of the older memory with
iterative gisting to allow having longer contexts, similar to older memories of humans being fuzzier. Though this is not in
the scope of this work, it may be useful for applications such as assistant agents, where context lengths can grow arbitrarily
long over time as the user interacts with the agent.
H. Comparing ReadAgent and MemWalker
As discussed in Section 2, similar to our work, MemWalker (Chen et al., 2023a) also reads long documents interactively like
an agent through iterative prompting, instead of forcing LLMs to process everything at once. It first constructs a summary
tree where the lowest-level leafs are segments of raw text, the second level nodes are summaries of text segments, and
the higher levels are summaries of summaries. Given a task, it traverses the tree from the root to search for task-related
information. We think there are a few reasons to prefer the ReadAgent approach over MemWalker.
First, the reliability is a concern. Having LLMs traverse summary tree may not be a reliable process. In our best-effort
re-implementation of MemWalker with PaLM 2-L, it unsatisfyingly achieves 66.73% on QuALITY. To put that into
perspective, using full raw content is 85.83%, ReadAgent-P (look up 1-5 pages) is 86.63%, ReadAgent-S (look up 1-6
pages) is 86.88%, and using BM25 Top-1 is 70.55%. Part of the performance difference is caused by a high search failure
rate. 11.7% of the searches failed to finish after sufficient retries. This failure rate of our implementation is in a similar range
to what the authors reported: 91.4% successes and 8.6% failures5. In contrast, the failure rate of ReadAgent is mostly 0%.
Second, the hierarchical summary structure makes it difficult to reason over related but distant information at the same
granularity. There isn’t much detail preserved at the top levels of the hierarchy. For example, if the two most important text
pieces are at the beginning and the end of a very long text, the essential information could be in the first and last leaf. As the
agent traverses down to the first leaf, it could be difficult to go back up to the root and down to the last leaf.
The motivations of the two approaches are also different. MemWalker interacts with a summary tree and reasons over
traversal trajectories, whereas ReadAgent interacts directly with documents and reasons over gist memories.
5https://openreview.net/forum?id=H5XZLeXWPS
18
