Hybrid LLM: Cost-Efficient and Quality-Aware Query Routing
Dujian Ding∗1, Ankur Mallick2, Chi Wang2, Robert Sim2, Subhabrata Mukherjee†3,
Victor Ruhle2, Laks V.S. Lakshmanan2, and Ahmed Awadallah2
1University of British Columbia
2Microsoft
3Hippocratic AI
dujian.ding@gmail.com
ankurmallick@microsoft.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) excel in most NLP tasks but also require expensive cloud
servers for deployment due to their size, while smaller models that can be deployed on lower cost
(e.g., edge) devices, tend to lag behind in terms of response quality. Therefore in this work we
propose a hybrid inference approach which combines their respective strengths to save cost and
maintain quality. Our approach uses a router that assigns queries to the small or large model
based on the predicted query difficulty and the desired quality level. The desired quality level
can be tuned dynamically at test time to seamlessly trade quality for cost as per the scenario
requirements. In experiments our approach allows us to make up to 40% fewer calls to the large
model, with no drop in response quality.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become the dominant force in natural language processing in
recent years [Zhao et al., 2023]. Their impact has been especially striking in generative applications
where it has extended beyond standard language understanding and question-answering benchmarks
like [Hendrycks et al., 2020, Srivastava et al., 2022] to several successful real-world deployments.
These include the wildly popular ChatGPT [OpenAI, b] and several other chatbots [Zheng et al.,
2023] powered by different LLMs [Taori et al., 2023, Touvron et al., 2023, OpenAI, 2023], which
allow users to engage in natural language conversations and obtain informative responses on a range
of practically useful tasks like creative writing, translation, code completion, etc. An important
added attraction of these models is their accessibility. Users can input queries and receive responses
in natural language, without any specialized data or code, and this is what has created such a
widespread demand for their services across regions, professions, and disciplines.
The best performing LLMs are based on the transformer architecture of [Vaswani et al., 2017]
and generally have tens of billions of parameters. E.g., Alpaca [Taori et al., 2023] has 13 billion
parameters, the best version of Llama-2 [Touvron et al., 2023] has 70 billion parameters, and
OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 [OpenAI, a], and GPT4 [OpenAI, 2023] are rumored to be much larger. Their
∗work performed during internship at Microsoft
†work performed while at Microsoft
1
arXiv:2404.14618v1  [cs.LG]  22 Apr 2024

(a) Accuracy v/s size of LLM
(b) Tail of accuracy difference
(c) Results with routing
Figure 1: We use a dataset of natural language queries from a range of tasks like question answering,
summarization, information extraction, etc. (See Section 4 for details). We observe that (a) smaller models
generally give poorer response quality or lower BART score [Yuan et al., 2021], (b) Llama-2 (13b) outperforms
GPT-3.5-turbo on around 20% examples, and (c) our router can make 22% fewer calls to GPT-3.5-turbo
(cost advantage) with 1% drop in response quality (BART score).
enormous size and the autoregressive nature of text generation in their transformer architectures
means that these models typically have a high compute and memory requirement that can only be
met by expensive cloud servers [Yu et al., 2022]. This can potentially impose an enormous cost on
developers and users as more LLM-based services are introduced. In response to this there has been
a surge of interest in designing smaller, cost-effective LLMs – e.g., [Touvron et al., 2023] provides
multiple versions of Llama-2, with the smallest having only 7 billion parameters, small enough to
run on a laptop1, while the smallest offering of Google’s Palm-2 model can even run on mobile
devices2. However empirical evaluations in [Chung et al., 2022, Touvron et al., 2023] as well as our
own evaluation in Figure 1a show that smaller models generally lag behind in terms of response
quality.
Faced with this tradeoff between response quality and inference cost, we propose a hybrid
inference approach which provides the best of both worlds. Our approach is motivated by the
observation that most tasks for which LLMs are useful, like creative writing, translation, code
completion, etc., include a range of queries of different difficulty levels and there is always a subset
of “easy” queries for which responses of a small (inexpensive and weak) model may be comparable
to, and sometimes even better than those of a large (expensive and powerful) model. This is also
illustrated in Figure 1b where we plot the tail of the quality gap (defined in Section 3) between the 13
billion parameter version of Llama-2 and OpenAI’s GPT-3.5-turbo, the model that powers ChatGPT.
Quality gap is non-negative for examples where the response quality of Llama-2 is comparable to or
better than that of GPT-3.5-turbo which is the case for around 20% queries in our dataset (described
in Section 4).
We leverage this insight to train a router that takes a large model and a small model as input,
and learns to identify these easy queries as a function of the desired level of response quality, while
taking into account the generative nature of tasks, inherent randomness in LLM responses, and
response quality disparity between the two models. At test time, the router seamlessly adjusts to
different response quality requirements and assigns the corresponding “easy” queries to the small
model, leading to significant inference cost reduction with minimal drop in response quality. In
1https://github.com/microsoft/Llama-2-Onnx
2https://blog.google/technology/ai/google-palm-2-ai-large-language-model/
2

Figure 2: Routing between edge and cloud.
Figure 1c our router assigns 22% of queries to Llama-2 (13b) 3 with less than 1% drop in response
quality measured in BART scores [Yuan et al., 2021]. The gains are even higher for pairs where the
small model is closer in terms of response quality to the large model (see Section 4).
With the explosion in the complexity and costs of LLM deployments, small companies and
individual consumers, have started to rely on the pre-existing LLMs hosted on platforms like
HuggingFace [Face] and OpenAI [OpenAI, c]. This is an instance of the broader Machine-Learning-
As-A-Service (MLaaS) paradigm, wherein users (small companies/individual consumers) interact
with the models through an API where they submit their queries [Kang et al., 2022] and have limited
visibility into the models themselves. In this context, our hybrid inference approach can reduce the
costs incurred by both consumers and platform owners because a) consumers can use it to route easy
queries to small models hosted on their edge devices (laptops/smartphones) and only call the API
for the more complex queries (illustrated in Figure 2) and b) platform owners can automatically
route queries to lower cost models at the backend without affecting the user experience, as long as
the response quality levels are maintained. Thus our hybrid inference approach offers a flexible and
cost-effective solution for harnessing the full potential of LLMs while accommodating diverse cost
budgets and quality requirements.
The main technical contributions of this work are: a) we are the first to explore cost-effective
and quality-aware hybrid LLM inference, b) we design a novel query router which routes queries
based on an estimate of the response quality gap between models (Section 3.1), c) we incorporate
uncertainty due to randomness in LLM responses in our router design to improve performance
(Section 3.2), d) we identify challenges for our router when the small model is significantly weaker
than the large model and introduce a novel data transformation to address this issue (Section 3.3),
and e) we provide extensive experimental results (Section 4) on a large benchmark dataset of real
world natural language queries and responses [Jiang et al., 2023] thereby demonstrating the value of
the approach and its superiority over baseline approaches, enabling LLM providers and consumers
to cost-efficiently enable LLM-backed experiences.
3We term the fraction of queries routed to the small model as the cost advantage (see §2.3)
3

2
Problem Formulation
2.1
Related Work
Large Language Models (LLMs). The advent of LLMs has led to a paradigm shift in
the study of natural language processing (NLP), computer vision, information retrieval, and other
domains[Menghani, 2023, Chen et al., 2023, Jiang et al., 2023]. The impressive effectiveness and
generalizability of LLMs has come at the price of a drastic increase in LLM sizes [Treviso et al., 2023]
and consequent challenges, including huge amounts of computational resources and data required to
train, and prohibitive expenses at both training and deployment stages [Bender et al., 2021].
Efficient Machine Learning (ML) Inference. LLMs belong to a class of models called
foundation models [Bommasani et al., 2021] – models that are trained once and can then be used
to serve a wide variety of tasks. As such, we expect inference cost to dominate the overall cost of
such models and hence focus on works that reduce the cost of ML inference [Menghani, 2023]. The
most common approach for efficient ML inference is model compression i.e., replacing a large model
with a smaller model of comparable accuracy. Common techniques for model compression include
(i) model pruning [Hassibi et al., 1993, LeCun et al., 1989] which drops parts of the model with
minimal accuracy loss, (ii) quantization [Jacob et al., 2018, Vanhoucke et al., 2011] which reduces
model memory footprints and inference latency by reducing the precision of data representation
(e.g., FP32 to INT8), (iii) knowledge distillation [Hinton et al., 2015, Urban et al., 2016] which trains
small student models to mimic large teacher models, and (iv) Neural Architecture Search [Elsken
et al., 2019, Zoph and Le, 2016] which tunes model architecture to improve model performance,
under inference cost constraints. Such static efficiency optimizations typically produce a fixed model
with lower inference cost and lower accuracy compared to the large model which may not suffice
for foundation models like LLMs, whose core premise is that the same model will serve a range of
tasks, each with its own accuracy/cost constraints. This is already manifesting in inference platforms
described in Section 1 which need more dynamic optimizations to meet the demands of all users.
Hybrid ML Inference. Recent works [Kag et al., 2022, Ding et al., 2022] have introduced a
new inference paradigm called hybrid inference which uses two models of different sizes instead of a
single model for inference. The smaller model (e.g. Llama2 [Touvron et al., 2023]) generally has
lower inference cost but also lower accuracy than the larger model (e.g. GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023]). The
key idea is to identify and route easy queries to the small model so that inference cost can be reduced
while maintaining response quality. By tuning a threshold on query difficulty we can dynamically
trade off quality and cost for the same inference setup. [Kag et al., 2022] study this setup for image
classification and propose to train the small model, large model, and router from scratch. However
LLM training is expensive and retraining LLMs from scratch for every scenario goes against the
very premise of inference with pre-trained foundation models. Moreover text generation [Iqbal and
Qureshi, 2022] is often more ambiguous and challenging than image classification due to which novel
techniques are required for effective hybrid LLM inference for text generation.
Inference with Multiple LLMs. Some recent works [Jiang et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2023,
Leviathan et al., 2023, Kim et al., 2023] use multiple LLMs for inference but these approaches
typically call more than one LLM for a single query that can incur significant computational
overheads. Specifically [Jiang et al., 2023] calls an ensemble of LLMs at inference time due to which
the inference cost will be proportional to the number of models in the system. [Chen et al., 2023]
performs inference using a cascade of LLMs where responses to the query are generated sequentially
by the LLMs in the cascade until one of the models has a confidence score higher than a predefined
4

threshold. Our work provides high quality responses while always making a single LLM call for all
queries and will thus incur much lower computational cost than both of these works on average.
Speculative decoding, introduced in [Leviathan et al., 2023, Kim et al., 2023] speeds up decoding of
expensive models by invoking small-and-efficient decoders on the “easy” decoding steps. Instead, in
our work we are interested in query routing which assigns “easy” queries to small models to reduce
overall inference costs while maintaining high performance. While the two approaches have different
goals, an interesting line of future work would be to combine these so that our router assigns queries
to the small or large model based on query difficulty and then speculative decoding is applied on
top to speed up inference for queries assigned to the large model thereby leading to further cost
reduction.
2.2
Problem Setting
We extend the hybrid ML paradigm to LLM inference by routing queries between two models
with different inference costs and accuracy. This allows platforms [Face, OpenAI, c] to route queries
across backend LLMs to lower costs while dynamically tuning the ratio of queries assigned to each
model as per user quality requirements. It also allows users with small models on local (edge) devices
to only call the platform for hard queries (Figure 2), thus significantly reducing their expenses.
We use X and Z to denote the input query space and the set of all possible output responses
respectively. Let L : X →Z denote the large model and S : X →Z denote the small model.
Formally, the objective in our paradigm is to learn a router r : X →{0, 1} such that each user query
x ∈X is routed to the small model S(x) if r(x) = 0, and to the large model L(x), otherwise. Note
that we always route each query to a single LLM at inference time as opposed to using an ensemble
[Jiang et al., 2023] or a cascade [Chen et al., 2023] of LLMs, which may call multiple LLMs to resolve
a single query and incur significant computational overheads.
2.3
Evaluation Metric
Response Quality Automatic evaluation for text generation is a challenging and widely studied
problem. Traditional metrics, such as BLEU and ROUGE, initially designed for machine translation
and summarization, have been found to be of limited concordance with human judgment and
restricted applicability across diverse NLP tasks [Blagec et al., 2022]. Significant research efforts have
been devoted to implementing task-agnostic evaluation metrics with neural networks. GPT-ranking
[Jiang et al., 2023], as a representative example, employs GPT models (e.g., GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023])
to provide relative rankings between pairs of generated outputs. In spite of the high correlation with
human perception, GPT-ranking suffers from high computational costs and inability to distinguish
between examples with the same ranking. Instead, we use the BART score [Yuan et al., 2021] to
evaluate response quality of different models since (1) it is inexpensive to compute in comparison to
LLM-based metrics such as GPT-ranking, and (2) it has been shown in prior work [Jiang et al., 2023]
that this metric correlates well with the ground truth. We also provide a case study in Appendix
C.2 to empirically justify using BART score as the response quality metric. We use q(z), q : Z →R
to denote the BART score (response quality) of model responses z ∈Z.
Cost Advantage The absolute costs of running a model may not be known a priori, and may
be expressed using a variety of metrics, including latency, FLOPs, energy consumption, etc. In
LLM inference, however, each of these metrics is affected by several underlying confounders such
as different prompt templates, hardware capability, network connectivity, etc. Moreover different
5

platforms/users may be interested in different metrics. However the common underlying assumption
in this and previous works on efficient ML inference is that smaller models are more efficient than
larger models and therefore we expect to obtain an improvement in all the metrics by routing more
queries to the smaller model. Hence we define cost advantage as the percentage of queries routed to
the smaller model. Note that the notion cost advantage has been used as a generic efficiency metric
in previous hybrid ML work [Kag et al., 2022], where it is termed as coverage.
3
Hybrid LLM Inference
Easy Queries.
We refer to queries for which the response quality of the small model is close to
the response quality of the large model as “easy” queries. The goal of our hybrid inference framework
is to identify the easy queries and route them to the small model thereby ensuring significant inference
cost reduction without much drop in response quality. Note that the easy queries as defined here,
need not necessarily be queries that are easy/inexpensive to respond to, they are just queries for
which the small model can match up to the large model. Examples of easy and hard queries as per
this definition are provided in Appendix C.1.
Quality Gap. We define quality gap of a query x as H(x) := q(S(x))−q(L(x)) i.e. the difference
in quality of the small model’s response S(x) and the large model’s response L(x). The quality
gap is a random variable since LLM responses are typically non-deterministic. This is illustrated in
Figure 3 below where the blue and orange plots correspond to the distribution of responses from
FLAN-t5 (800m) 4 [Chung et al., 2022] and Llama-2 (13b) [Touvron et al., 2023] for a single query.
Figure 3: Response quality distribution for
FLAN-t5 (800m) and Llama-2 (13b) on the
query “How to identify the index of me-
dian?” measured in BART scores. Llama-2
(13b) with transformation significantly over-
laps with FLAN-t5 (800m).
Proposed Orchestration Framework. Queries are
routed using a BERT-style encoder model (e.g., DeBERTa,
[He et al., 2020]) which is trained on a dataset of rep-
resentative queries and learns to predict a score. Since
the router is an encoder model, a single pass of the query
through it is sufficient to generate the score and we assume
that the cost of this step is negligible compared to the cost
of running autoregressive decoding using the large model
L(x) [Sun et al., 2019]. Thus, we expect that using the
router to route queries to the small model will not detract
significantly from the realizable cost advantage.
Router Score. We design the router score to be large
for easy queries as defined above. Intuitively, an estimate
of Pr[H(x) ≥0] is a suitable candidate since a large value
of Pr[H(x) ≥0] = Pr[q(S(x)) ≥q(L(x))] corresponds
to queries for which there is a high likelihood that the
response quality of the small model will be at least as high
as that of the large model. However we show below that
in scenarios where the large model is significantly more
powerful than the small model i.e. q(S(x)) << q(L(x)) in general, one can train more effective
routers by relaxing the definition of easy queries to Pr[H(x) ≥−t] = Pr[q(S(x)) ≥q(L(x)) −t] for
an appropriate t > 0. At test time we achieve the desired performance accuracy tradeoff by tuning a
threshold on the score and routing queries with score above the threshold to the small model. For a
4We use the FLAN-t5-large model from https://huggingface.co/google/flan-t5-large.
6

router with parameters w, we denote router score by pw(x), pw : X →[0, 1]. We discuss different
router score designs in the rest of this section assuming a training set of N queries x1, . . . , xN.
3.1
Deterministic Router
Previous work on hybrid ML [Ding et al., 2022, Kag et al., 2022] makes the assumption that
neural models are deterministic functions that map input features to a single point in the output
space. To realize this for LLMs, we sample a single response per query from each model. We assign
boolean labels ydet
i
= 1[q(S(xi)) ≥q(L(xi))], i = 1, . . . , N to each training query with the BART
score as the quality function q(.). Our router is trained by minimizing the binary cross-entropy loss
[Ruby and Yendapalli, 2020].
L(w) = −1
N
N
X
i=1
 ydet
i
log(pw(xi)) + (1 −ydet
i
) log(1 −pw(xi))

(1)
Observe that the assigned labels ydet
i
can be viewed as an estimate for Pr[H(xi) ≥0] given a single
response per query from each model and thus minimizing the above loss encourages the router score
pw(x) to be close to Pr[H(x) ≥0] for test queries. We refer to this deterministic router as rdet.
3.2
Probabilistic Router
The determinism assumption can be justified for tasks where the ground truth labels are often
explicit and unique such as image classification [Masana et al., 2022] and video segmentation [Yao
et al., 2020]. When it comes to NLP tasks, however, there is usually no single best answer due to the
intrinsic ambiguity and complexity of natural languages. LLMs are widely used as non-deterministic
generators to capture the intrinsic uncertainty of NLP tasks, as shown in Figure 3 (ignore the dashed
curve for now). The non-determinism mainly comes from the randomness in the decoding phase.
Users typically control the level of uncertainty by choosing different decoding strategies such as
nucleus sampling [Holtzman et al., 2019], as well as the values of the hyper-parameter temperature.
Intuitively, higher temperature values result in a higher level of randomness and diversity among the
generated responses. For black-box LLM APIs such as GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023], it has been observed
that even upon setting temperature to the minimum value 0, it can still provide different responses
for the same input queries. The underlying mechanism is still an open problem while a recent study
hints at the instability of the MoE backbone [Skyward, 2023].
We propose to incorporate the uncertainty due to the non-deterministic nature of LLM com-
parisons into the router training loss by relaxing the hard labels ydet
i
∈{0, 1} to the soft labels
yprob
i
:= Pr[H(xi) ≥0] = Pr[q(S(xi)) ≥q(L(xi))] = E[1[q(S(xi)) ≥q(L(xi))]] where E denotes the
expectation. In practice, we estimate expectation by sampling 10 responses from each model and
computing the sample average of the corresponding indicator function values. Observe that the
hard label ydet
i
is a higher-variance estimate of E[1[q(S(xi)) ≥q(L(xi))]] (since it is obtained from a
single sample) and hence we expect improved performance with the following training loss,
L(w) = −1
N
N
X
i=1

yprob
i
log(pw(xi)) + (1 −yprob
i
) log(1 −pw(xi))

(2)
We refer to this probabilistic router as rprob.
7

(a) Before transformation.
(b) Grid search for the best t.
(c) After transformation.
Figure 4: Effect of data transformation on labels for training the router.
3.3
Probabilistic Router with Data Transformation
While so far we have designed scores that try to estimate Pr[H(x) ≥0], we observe that the
empirical estimate of Pr[H(xi) ≥0] = E[1[q(S(xi)) ≥q(L(xi))]] tends to be extremely small when
the large model is significantly more powerful than the small model (0 for almost 90% of the queries
in Figure 4a with Flan-t5 (800m) as the small model and Llama-2 (13b) as the large model). Because
q(S(x)) << q(L(x)) for most queries in this case, it provides an extremely weak signal for training
using Equation (2) and as shown in Section 4 both rdet and rprob fail to provide much improvement
over random query assignment in this case.
Traditional approaches for learning with imbalanced data have their own shortcomings [Krawczyk,
2016]. Moreover our goal is to only design a router that can reduce inference cost while maintaining
response quality as much as possible and so we are not tied to a particular definition of class labels
to achieve this. We leverage this flexibility to introduce new labels ytrans
i
(t) := Pr[H(xi) ≥−t] =
Pr[q(S(xi)) > q(L(xi)) −t] for some t > 0. Since −t < 0, Pr[H(x) ≥−t] ≥Pr[H(x) ≥0] by
definition of the tail distribution and so we expect this relaxation to provide a stronger signal for
router training while still allowing us to identify the easy queries i.e. those queries for which q(S(x))
has a high likelihood of being close to q(L(x)) (q(S(x)) > q(L(x)) −t). Visually, this corresponds
to comparing the distribution of the small model’s response with a shifted distribution of the large
model’s response to a query (dotted curve in Figure 3).
Now the question is how to choose the best relaxation t? Given that tail probability Pr[H(x) ≥−t]
lies in [0, 1], we choose t by maximizing the average pairwise differences between the transformed
labels to push them as far apart as possible and provide a strong signal for training. Thus we set,
t∗= arg max
t
1
N 2
X
(i,i′)
| ytrans
i
(t) −ytrans
i′
(t) |
(3)
We currently solve the above optimization problem via grid-search and leave more sophisticated
approaches for future work. We plot the optimization objective for different values of t for our
training dataset in Section 3.3 and show the distribution of transformed labels ytrans
i
(t∗) in Figure 4c.
As we see, the distribution is significantly more balanced now and we expect the resulting router to
be much more effective. Once again, we train the router by minimizing the loss
L(w) = −1
N
N
X
i=1
 ytrans
i
(t∗) log(pw(xi)) + (1 −ytrans
i
(t∗)) log(1 −pw(xi))

(4)
and we refer to this probabilistic router as rtrans.
8

Cost
Advantage
(%)
Response Quality (BART Score) Drop w.r.t all-at-large (%)
S: Llama-2 (7b)
S: Llama-2 (13b)
S: FLAN-t5 (800m)
L: Llama-2 (13b)
L: GPT-3.5-turbo
L: Llama-2 (13b)
rdet
rprob
rtrans
rdet
rprob
rtrans
rdet
rprob
rtrans
10
0.1
-0.1
0.1
0.1
-0.1
0.2
2.3
2.2
2.1
20
0.1
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
5.8
5.8
4.7
40
0.2
0.1
0.0
3.5
3.4
2.9
13.8
13.1
10.3
Table 1: Cost advantage v.s. performance drop for model pairs of different performance gaps. Performance
drops are computed w.r.t. the all-at-large baseline.
4
Evaluation
4.1
Evaluation Setup
Dataset. We use the MixInstruct dataset from [Jiang et al., 2023] to evaluate the effectiveness of
different routing strategies across a wide range of tasks (e.g., question answering, summarization,
information extraction). MixInstruct is a large-scale collection of real-world instructions and consists
of examples from four public datasets (see Table 5 in Appendix B). The broad range of tasks in
the dataset enables us to train a generic router that will be effective across different scenarios. We
uniformly sample 10k training examples from the training split of MixInstruct, for each of which we
generate 10 responses from all LLMs under consideration. Our validation and test splits are the
same as the MixInstruct dataset, which consist of 5k instruction examples separately.
Router Model. We use DeBERTa-v3-large [He et al., 2020] (300M) as the backbone to train
our routers. We train each router with the corresponding loss from Section 3 for 5 epochs and
use the validation set to choose the best checkpoints for final evaluation. All experiments are
conducted with 1 NVIDIA A100 GPU of 80GB GPU RAM. We have made our source code available
at https://github.com/m365-core/hybrid_llm_routing.
Evaluation Measures. We use BART score [Yuan et al., 2021] as the quality metric and
use fraction of queries routed to the small model (cost advantage) as the efficiency metric (see
Section 2.3).
Baselines. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no prior work specifically on routing
between LLMs. We consider three straightforward baselines: all-at-large, all-at-small, and random.
All-at-large routes all queries to the large model, while all-at-small routes all queries to the small
model. Random generates a random number in [0,1] and selects the large model if it is below the
probability threshold.
Experiments. We investigate all three routers (see Section 3): the deterministic router rdet, the
probabilistic router rprob, and the probabilistic router augmented with data transformation rtrans.
We select candidate model pairs from FLAN-T5 (800m), FLAN-T5 (11b), Llama-2 (7b), Llama-2
(13b), and GPT-3.5-turbo for our experiments. At test time the trained router (rdet, rprob, or rtrans)
takes a threshold value as input and routes all queries with router score higher than the threshold to
the small model as these are the easy queries. We evaluate the router performance in Section 4.2 in
terms of both BART score and cost advantage (Figure 5 and Table 1), validate that the router is
9

(a) Small performance gap
(b) Medium performance gap
(c) Large performance gap
Figure 5: Error-cost tradeoffs achieved by rdet, rprob, and rtrans for different performance gaps.
indeed routing easy queries to the small model in Section 4.3, demonstrate that our routers are of
negligible compute overhead in Section 4.4, show how to choose routing thresholds in practice in
Section 4.5, evaluate the effectiveness of our routers using a response quality metric other than the
BART score in Section 4.6, and test the generalizability of routers across model pairs in Section 4.7.
4.2
Router Performance Results
Small performance gap. LLMs of the same architectures are observed to be of small perfor-
mance gap such as Llama-2 (7b) v.s. Llama-2 (13b), as seen in Figure 5a. In this case, by trading
little to no performance drop, we show that (1) the deterministic router rdet can achieve good cost
advantages, (2) rprob consistently improves rdet, and (3) rtrans is able to match or slightly improve
the performance of rprob. Numerical comparison results are summarized in Table 1. rdet routes 20%
(40%) queries to the small model i.e. Llama-2 (7b) with only 0.1% (0.2%) drop in response quality
w.r.t. the all-at-large baseline. Impressively rprob and rtrans achieve 20% cost advantages without
any quality drop, and rtrans is able to achieve even 20% cost advantage without quality drop, which
can be attributed to these methods capturing the non-deterministic nature of LLMs.
Medium performance gap. Often there is only a moderate performance gap between leading
open-source LLMs like Llama-2 (13b) and state-of-the-art commodified LLMs, such as GPT-3.5-turbo
(Figure 5b). In this case, all our routers deliver reasonable cost advantages with acceptable quality
drop. The effectiveness order between rdet, rprob, and rtrans resembles that in the small quality gap
case. All routers achieve 20% (40%) cost advantage with ≤1% (≤4%) quality drop (Table 1). In
the 40% cost advantage regime, rprob slightly outperforms rdet and rtrans improves rprob by 0.5% in
terms of quality drop.
Large performance gap. In the edge-cloud routing scenarios, edge devices often have very
limited resources and can only support small models of limited quality, which can be significantly
10

(a) Small performance diff.
(b) Medium quality gaps.
(c) Large quality gaps.
Figure 6: Difference between average quality gap of queries routed to the small and large models with different
performance gaps.
outperformed by large models deployed on the cloud. We investigate how to effectively route queries
with LLM pairs of large performance gaps, such as FLAN-t5 (800m) and Llama-2 (13b) (Figure 5c).
Non-trivial routing is challenging in this situation since the large model dominates for a majority
of examples. Both rdet and rprob perform marginally better than the random routing baseline. In
contrast, rtrans can still effectively distinguish relatively easy queries from the harder ones. rtrans
achieves 40% cost advantages with 10.3% quality drop, which is 3.5% and 2.8% lower than rdet and
rprob respectively (Table 1).
In the course of these experiments we made the following interesting observations:
1. When the cost advantage is modest (e.g., 10%) and the LLM performance gaps are not large
(e.g., Llama-2 (7b) v.s. Llama-2 (13b)) rprob is able to achieve even better performance than
all-at-large which leads to the “negative quality drops” in Table 1. This is because, as seen
from the large value of Pr[H(x) ≥0] in the tail distribution in Figure 5, the response quality of
the small model may be higher than that of the large model for several queries and by routing
these queries to the small model, the router is able to even beat all-at-large.
2. For lower cost advantages (≤10%) and small or moderate LLM performance gaps rtrans
can be slightly outperformed by rdet or rprob. This might be due noise in the estimation of
the relaxation parameter t from sample averages instead of expectation in Equation (3) and
from the grid search process leading to suboptimal settings of rtrans. However we clearly see
that in more challenging routing scenarios with high cost advantage targets or large LLM
performance gaps, both rdet and rprob have difficulty in correctly routing queries, and rtrans
starts to dominate due to the benefits of the data transformation.
4.3
Router Validation Results
We also validate that the router is functioning as intended, that is, routing easy queries to the
small model and hard queries to the large model. To see this, in Figure 6 we plot the difference
between the average quality gaps of queries routed to the small model and those routed to the
large model for our router and the random baseline v/s different values of cost advantages (i.e., the
fraction of queries routed to the small model). Since the random baseline randomly assigns queries
the average difference is nearly always zero. However our router routes easy queries i.e. queries with
large quality gap (q(S(x)) −q(L(x))) to the small model and queries with small quality gap to the
11

large model. Hence the difference between the average quality gaps always has a significant positive
value indicating that more easy queries are routed to the small model than to the large model in our
approach as compared to the random assignment approach at all cost advantages.
4.4
Router Latency
We measure the latency of our router and compare it to the latency of the different LLMs –
Flan-t5 (800m), Llama-2 (7b), and Llama-2 (13b) that we use in our experiments for generating
responses to user queries. Note that the latency of all the routers rdet, rprob, and rtrans will be
the same since they use the same model (DeBERTa-v3-large [He et al., 2020]) and are just trained
differently. Also, we do not measure the latency of GPT-3.5-turbo since its responses are generated
by querying the OpenAI API [OpenAI, c] as the model weights are not publicly available due to
which it is not possible to disentangle the inference latency from the network latency, queueing
delay, latency of the API call, etc. However we note that the inference latency of all other LLMs
we consider is significantly larger than that of the router (see Table 2) and therefore we expect the
same to hold for GPT-3.5-turbo as well.
The latency results are reported in Table 2 where we measure the average latency per query
averaged over 200 randomly chosen queries from our dataset (confidence bounds correspond to one
standard error). As expected the router processes queries significantly faster than all the LLMs
(nearly 10× faster than the fastest LLM – FLAN-t5(800m)). This is both due to its smaller size
(300m parameters) and the fact that it performs a single forward pass over the query to generate
the score while the LLMs generate the response token-by-token in an autoregressive fashion due to
which the inference latency is proportional to the response length. Thus the router adds minimal
overhead to the inference cost due to its small size and extremely low latency.
Model
Latency (seconds)
Router
0.036 ± 0.002
FLAN-t5 (800m)
0.46 ± 0.039
Llama-2 (7b)
7.99 ± 0.15
Llama-2 (13b)
14.61 ± 0.27
Table 2: Latency Values for Different Models
4.5
Empirical Determination Of Routing Threshold
Recall that at test time the model owner is required to set a threshold on the router score which
serves to separate the easy queries from the hard ones (see Section 3). All queries with router score
higher than the threshold will be routed to the small model. Thus the threshold is a user-defined
parameter controlling the achieved efficiency-performance trade-off, to best serve the interests of
different users. In this section we show how to empirically choose thresholds on router scores to
achieve cost reduction with little to no performance drops. For this, we use a small calibration set to
recommend default thresholds to users. We investigate all three routers rdet, rprob, and rtrans with
different LLM pairs that we use in our experiments. For each LLM pair, we randomly draw 500
samples from the validation set and use grid search to determine the threshold that delivers the
highest cost advantages i.e., cost savings on the validation set while keeping the performance drop
12

Router
S: Llama-2 (7b)
L: Llama-2 (13b)
S: Llama-2 (13b)
L: GPT-3.5-turbo
S: FLAN-t5 (800m)
L: Llama-2 (13b)
Perf. Drop
Cost Adv.
Perf. Drop
Cost Adv.
Perf. Drop
Cost Adv.
rdet
Val.
0.99%
98.20%
0.97%
15.20%
0.77%
5.40%
Test
1.60%
98.56%
0.55%
15.15%
0.69%
4.89%
rprob
Val.
0.92%
97.60%
0.56%
8.60%
0.70%
5.00%
Test
1.42%
96.80%
0.11%
8.38%
0.57%
4.44%
rtrans
Val.
0.79%
96.00%
0.77%
17.00%
0.92%
4.00%
Test
1.39%
96.45%
0.49%
15.68%
1.02%
5.05%
Table 3: Test performance drops v.s. cost advantages achieved by thresholds chosen from 500 validation
samples with ≤1% sampled performance drops.
(reduction in BART score) less than 1%. The limit on performance drop can be adjusted as per
user requirements. With the selected thresholds, we report the achieved performance drops and cost
advantages on the test sets, as summarized in Table 3.
As seen from the table the performance and the cost advantage obtained on the test sets closely
follows that on the validation sets for all categories of LLM pairs. This clearly illustrates that
a threshold chosen on the validation set generalizes well to the test set. We note that there is a
slight increase in the performance drop from the validation to the test set for the LLama-2 (7b)
and Llama-2 (13b) pair, i.e the LLM pair with small performance gap as per the categorization in
Section 4. However this is also the pair with the highest cost advantage or cost savings (> 96%
for all routers) and thus the issue can be addressed by just using a more conservative limit on the
performance drop while choosing the threshold which would still lead to very significant cost savings.
4.6
Alternate Evaluation Metrics
To provide a more comprehensive evaluation of our routers, we test the routing performance with
metrics in addition to BART score [Yuan et al., 2021]. GPT-4-based evaluators have been found
to be well correlated with human assessments [Liu et al., 2023, Chase, 2022]. We generate GPT-4
evaluation scores (integer ratings from 1 to 10) for test responses from Flan-t5 (800m), Llama-2 (7b),
Llama-2 (13b), and GPT-3.5-turbo that we investigate in our experiments, using LangChain scoring
evaluator [Chase, 2022]. Recall that our routers are trained with BART score due to efficiency and
effectiveness reasons as discussed in Section 2.3. Intuitively, if the quality gaps measured by BART
score and GPT-4 score are highly correlated, we could expect good routing performance even under
the GPT-4 score as we have seen in Section 4.2. We compute the correlation between quality gaps
measured by BART score and GPT-4 score, and report it along with routing performance evaluated
with GPT-4 score, as shown in Figure 7.
Aligned with our intuition, when the two metrics are well correlated (Figure 7a), our routers
trained with BART score are still effective even when evaluated against GPT-4 score. Typically,
rdet, rprob, and rtrans are able to achieve 20% cost advantage with up to 1% performance drop,
and 40% cost advantage with up to 2.1% performance drop. As the correlation gets weaker, the
router performance gradually decays, as shown in Figure 7b and 7c. This observation suggests a
simple-yet-effective strategy of using BART score in practice to save labelling costs while maintaining
13

(a) High correlation (r = 0.46, ρ =
0.44).
(b) Medium correlation (r = 0.38, ρ =
0.38).
(c) Low correlation (r = 0.26, ρ =
0.27).
Figure 7: Routing performance evaluated with GPT-4 scores. Pearson (r) and spearman (ρ) correlation
coefficients between quality gaps measured by BART score and GPT-4 score are computed for each LLM pair.
routing performance. We can first compute the correlation between BART score and the target
metrics (e.g., human assessments) using a small sample and use BART score as training labels
whenever there is strong positive correlation with target metrics.
4.7
Generalizing To Different Model Pairs
We evaluate the generalizability of our routers by testing their routing performance on LLM
pairs different than the pairs they were trained with. We compute the correlation between quality
gaps of training and testing LLM pairs, and report it along with routing performance, as shown in
Figure 8.
Similar to our observation in Section 4.6, our routers can generalize well if the quality gaps of
testing LLM pairs exhibit strong positive correlation with the quality gaps of the training pairs. In
Figure 8a, both pearson and spearman correlation coefficients exceed 0.7, and all three routers are
able to achieve 20% cost advantage with up to 1.6% performance drop, and 40% cost advantage with
up to 4.1% performance drop. As the correlation becomes weaker, the generalizability of our router
gets restricted and routing performance decays, as shown in Figure 8b and 8c. This observation
sheds light on using the quality gap correlation as an effective indicator to decide if our routers can
be applied to new LLM pairs in the early stage. Given a pair of LLMs (source pair) and a router
trained on this pair we can measure the correlation between the quality gap of the source pair and
the quality gap of any new target pair of LLMs to decide if the router will be effective on the target
pair.
5
Discussion and Conclusion
Motivated by the need to optimize the trade-off between LLM inference costs and response
quality, we have presented a hybrid inference approach based on quality-aware query routing. We
train a router to discriminate between “hard” and “easy” queries, enabling the LLM provider to make
cost-efficient decisions about which model should serve a given query. Our experimental results on a
variety of state-of-the-art LLMs of varying sizes show that such an optimization is possible and that
we can realize cost advantages of up to 40% with no significant drop in response quality.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work exploring the possibilities of cost-effective
14

(a) High correlation(r=0.76, ρ=0.71)
(b) Med. correlation(r=0.55, ρ=0.50)
(c) Low correlation(r=0.06, ρ=0.02)
Figure 8: Routing performance on the testing LLM pairs that are different than the pairs routers were trained
with. Pearson (r) and spearman (ρ) correlation coefficients between quality gaps of the training and testing
LLM pairs are computed for each setting.
and quality-aware query routing between LLMs. We identify several important extensions for future
work: (1) Task-aware routing. Our current routers make routing decisions purely based on query
inputs. To improve routing effectiveness, we can provide more informative signals which help routers
distinguish easy queries from the hard ones, such as task labels for query examples and can also
identify tasks which may be more suited to routing for a given pair of LLMs. (2) Generalizing to
N-model routing. Modern MLaaS platforms typically host a large number of LLM instances of the
same or different configurations to efficiently serve users in different scenarios. This naturally forms
a more challenging routing problem with richer optimization opportunities (e.g., load balancing) (3)
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. In this work, the model pair and data distribution
is fixed across training and testing. In the real-world it may be cumbersome/infeasible to train a new
router for every new model pair and for every new data distribution. Therefore there is a need for
techniques to generalize our approach to changes in the model pair and/or data distribution at test
time. (4) Novel evaluation metrics. Effective evaluation metrics are critical to train high-quality
routers. It is intriguing to see how to develop metrics of higher human-judgment correlation and to
which extent it will improve the routing performance.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Daniel Madrigal Diaz, Mirian del Carmen Hipolito Garcia, Chen
Dun, Guoqing Zheng, Menglin Xia, Wen Xiao, and Jieyu Zhang for helpful discussions.
References
E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and S. Shmitchell. On the dangers of stochastic
parrots : can language models be too big?
In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 610–623, Virtual Event Canada, Mar. 2021.
ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-8309-7. doi: 10.1145/3442188.3445922. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/
10.1145/3442188.3445922.
K. Blagec, G. Dorffner, M. Moradi, S. Ott, and M. Samwald. A global analysis of metrics used for
measuring performance in natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11574, 2022.
15

R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg,
A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill, et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
H. Chase. LangChain, Oct. 2022. URL https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain.
L. Chen, M. Zaharia, and J. Zou. Frugalgpt: How to use large language models while reducing cost
and improving performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05176, 2023.
H. W. Chung, L. Hou, S. Longpre, B. Zoph, Y. Tay, W. Fedus, E. Li, X. Wang, M. Dehghani,
S. Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416,
2022.
D. Ding, S. Amer-Yahia, and L. V. Lakshmanan. On efficient approximate queries over machine
learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02845, 2022.
T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, and F. Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1997–2017, 2019.
H. Face. Hugging face inference api. https://huggingface.co/inference-api.
B. Hassibi, D. G. Stork, and G. J. Wolff. Optimal brain surgeon and general network pruning. In
IEEE international conference on neural networks, pages 293–299. IEEE, 1993.
P. He, X. Liu, J. Gao, and W. Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert with disentangled attention.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03654, 2020.
D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt. Measuring
massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, J. Dean, et al. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7), 2015.
A. Holtzman, J. Buys, L. Du, M. Forbes, and Y. Choi. The curious case of neural text degeneration.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.
T. Iqbal and S. Qureshi. The survey: Text generation models in deep learning. Journal of King
Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, 34(6):2515–2528, 2022.
B. Jacob, S. Kligys, B. Chen, M. Zhu, M. Tang, A. Howard, H. Adam, and D. Kalenichenko.
Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 2704–2713,
2018.
D. Jiang, X. Ren, and B. Y. Lin. Llm-blender: Ensembling large language models with pairwise
ranking and generative fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02561, 2023.
A. Kag, I. Fedorov, A. Gangrade, P. Whatmough, and V. Saligrama. Efficient edge inference by
selective query. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
D. Kang, T. Hashimoto, I. Stoica, and Y. Sun. Scaling up trustless dnn inference with zero-knowledge
proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08674, 2022.
16

S. Kim, K. Mangalam, S. Moon, J. Malik, M. W. Mahoney, A. Gholami, and K. Keutzer. Speculative
decoding with big little decoder. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023.
B. Krawczyk. Learning from imbalanced data: open challenges and future directions. Progress in
Artificial Intelligence, 5(4):221–232, 2016.
Y. LeCun, J. Denker, and S. Solla. Optimal brain damage. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 2, 1989.
Y. Leviathan, M. Kalman, and Y. Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative decoding.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023.
Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, and C. Zhu. G-eval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better
human alignment, may 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634, 2023.
M. Masana, X. Liu, B. Twardowski, M. Menta, A. D. Bagdanov, and J. Van De Weijer. Class-
incremental learning: survey and performance evaluation on image classification. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(5):5513–5533, 2022.
G. Menghani. Efficient deep learning: A survey on making deep learning models smaller, faster, and
better. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–37, 2023.
OpenAI. Openai gpt-3.5-turbo. https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3-5, a.
OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://chat.openai.com/, b.
OpenAI. Openai platform. https://platform.openai.com/overview, c.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
U. Ruby and V. Yendapalli. Binary cross entropy with deep learning technique for image classification.
Int. J. Adv. Trends Comput. Sci. Eng, 9(10), 2020.
L. Skyward. Gpt-4 is non-deterministic and moe is the likely reason why, Aug 2023. URL https:
//ai.plainenglish.io/gpt-4-is-non-deterministic-af202847529c.
A. Srivastava, A. Rastogi, A. Rao, A. A. M. Shoeb, A. Abid, A. Fisch, A. R. Brown, A. Santoro,
A. Gupta, A. Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating
the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.
Z. Sun, Z. Li, H. Wang, D. He, Z. Lin, and Z. Deng. Fast structured decoding for sequence models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, X. Li, C. Guestrin, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto. Stan-
ford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_
alpaca, 2023.
H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra,
P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
17

M. Treviso, J.-U. Lee, T. Ji, B. v. Aken, Q. Cao, M. R. Ciosici, M. Hassid, K. Heafield, S. Hooker,
C. Raffel, et al. Efficient methods for natural language processing: A survey. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:826–860, 2023.
G. Urban, K. J. Geras, S. E. Kahou, O. Aslan, S. Wang, R. Caruana, A. Mohamed, M. Philipose,
and M. Richardson. Do deep convolutional nets really need to be deep and convolutional? arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.05691, 2016.
V. Vanhoucke, A. Senior, and M. Z. Mao. Improving the speed of neural networks on cpus. 2011.
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin.
Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
R. Yao, G. Lin, S. Xia, J. Zhao, and Y. Zhou. Video object segmentation and tracking: A survey.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 11(4):1–47, 2020.
G.-I. Yu, J. S. Jeong, G.-W. Kim, S. Kim, and B.-G. Chun. Orca: A distributed serving system
for {Transformer-Based} generative models. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI 22), pages 521–538, 2022.
W. Yuan, G. Neubig, and P. Liu. Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text generation. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27263–27277, 2021.
W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Min, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong, et al.
A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. Xing, et al.
Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.
B. Zoph and Q. V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.01578, 2016.
18
