AGENTLESS
:
Demystifying LLM-based Software Engineering Agents
Chunqiu Steven Xia∗Yinlin Deng∗Soren Dunn
Lingming Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{chunqiu2, yinlind2, sorend2, lingming}@illinois.edu
Abstract
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have significantly
advanced the automation of software development tasks, including code
synthesis, program repair, and test generation. More recently, researchers
and industry practitioners have developed various autonomous LLM
agents to perform end-to-end software development tasks. These agents are
equipped with the ability to use tools, run commands, observe feedback
from the environment, and plan for future actions. However, the complexity
of these agent-based approaches, together with the limited abilities of
current LLMs, raises the following question: Do we really have to employ
complex autonomous software agents? To attempt to answer this question,
we build AGENTLESS – an agentless approach to automatically resolve
software development issues. Compared to the verbose and complex setup
of agent-based approaches, AGENTLESS employs a simplistic three-phase
process of localization, repair, and patch validation, without letting the
LLM decide future actions or operate with complex tools. Our results
on the popular SWE-bench Lite benchmark show that surprisingly the
simplistic AGENTLESS is able to achieve both the highest performance
(32.00%, 96 correct fixes) and low cost ($0.70) compared with all existing
open-source software agents! In fact, AGENTLESS has already been adopted
by OpenAI as the go-to approach to showcase the real-world coding performance
of both GPT-4o and the new OpenAI o1 models. Furthermore, we manually
classified the problems in SWE-bench Lite and found problems with exact
ground truth patches or insufficient/misleading issue descriptions. As
such, we construct SWE-bench Lite-S by excluding such problematic issues
to perform more rigorous evaluation and comparison. Our work highlights
the currently overlooked potential of a simplistic, cost-effective technique
in autonomous software development. We hope AGENTLESS will help reset
the baseline, starting point, and horizon for autonomous software agents,
and inspire future work along this crucial direction. We have open-sourced
AGENTLESS at: https://github.com/OpenAutoCoder/Agentless
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become the go-to default choice for code gener-
ation [31, 28, 53, 89]. State-of-the-art LLMs like GPT-4 [71] and Claude 3.5 Sonnet [26]
have demonstrated their prowess in being able to synthesize code snippets based on
given user description. However, compared to the main evaluation setting of simple,
self-contained problems, applying LLMs on repository-level software engineering tasks
has been understudied. Software engineering tasks like feature addition, program repair,
and test generation require an in-depth understanding of not only information within files,
containing thousands of lines of code, but also repository-level dependencies across files.
∗Contributed equally with author ordering decided by Nigiri.
1
arXiv:2407.01489v2  [cs.SE]  29 Oct 2024

Recently, to address the gap and evaluate the ability of tools to automatically solve
real-world software engineering problems, the popular SWE-bench [44] benchmark has
been developed. In SWE-bench, each problem consists of a real-world GitHub issue
description and the corresponding Python repository. The task is to modify the repository
to resolve the issue, either fixing a bug or introducing a new feature. Recently, the authors
have published a subset of the benchmark – SWE-bench Lite [23] (300 problems) that
performs further filtering and focuses on bug fixing issues.
To solve the challenging real-world software development problems from SWE-bench,
inspired by the Devin AI Software Engineer [7], there has been a significant body
of work from both academia and industry focusing on developing agent-based ap-
proaches [108, 37, 101, 30, 64, 29]. While there is not a fixed definition for agent-based
approaches, they generally equip LLMs with a set of tools and allow agents to iteratively and
autonomously perform actions, observe feedback, and plan future steps [56]. Example tools
can include the ability to open/write/create files, search for code lines, run tests, and execute
shell commands. In each attempt to solve a problem, agent-based approaches will have
multiple turns, where each turn consists of performing an action. Subsequent turns depend
on previous actions and the feedback information the agent receives from the environment.
At first glance, agent-based approaches appear to be a natural and straightforward way
to tackle software development tasks. After all, human developers also perform similar
actions and use feedback to plan future steps. However, the disparity between human and
current LLM abilities leads to the following limitations of agent-based approaches:
• Complex tool usage/design. To utilize tools, current agent-based approaches apply an
abstraction layer between the agent and the environment. Examples are mapping real
actions to API calls so that agents can use tools by outputting an API call instruction. How-
ever, such abstractions and API call specifications require careful design of input/output
formats and can easily lead to incorrect or imprecise tool design/usage, especially for
more complex action spaces. Given the iterative nature of agent-based approaches, where
current action/plan depends on previous turns, incorrectly or imprecisely defining/using
a tool can both reduce performance and incur additional cost in wasted LLM queries.
• Lack of control in decision planning. In addition to using tools, current agent-based
approaches also delegate the decision-making process to the agents, allowing them to
decide when and what action to perform. The agents decide the current action to take
based on previous actions taken and the feedback provided by the environment, often
with minimal checks to ensure the action taken make sense. Due to the large possible
action space and feedback response, it can be extremely easy for autonomous agents
to become confused and perform sub-optimal explorations. Furthermore, to solve an
issue, an agent can take upwards of 30 or 40 turns, which makes it extremely difficult to
both understand the decisions made by the agents and also debug the exact turns where
an incorrect decision is made.
• Limited ability to self-reflect. Existing agents struggle with the capability to perform
self-reflection [69, 41]. That is to say they tend to take all information/feedback and do not
know how to filter out or correct irrelevant, incorrect, or misleading information [84, 107].
The limited ability to self-reflect means that an incorrect step can be easily amplified and
negatively affect all future decisions made by the agent.
In this paper, we advocate that instead of rushing to develop increasingly complex LLM
agent-based approaches and tools for software development (which can also be non-trivial
to use or replicate due to the fully autonomous setup), we should first take a step back
and ask the following introspective question: Do we really have to employ complex autonomous
software agents?
Our work. We set out to answer this important question by building AGENTLESS – an
agentless approach to automatically resolve software development issues. To solve each
issue, AGENTLESS follows a simple three phase process: localization, repair, and patch
validation. In the localization process, AGENTLESS employs a hierarchical process to
first localize the fault to specific files, then to relevant classes or functions, and finally to
fine-grained edit locations. AGENTLESS’s localization process make uses of both LLM-based
localization as well classic information-retrieval-based localization idea [109]. To perform
2

repair, AGENTLESS takes the localized edit locations and generates multiple candidate
patches in a simple diff format. At the same time, AGENTLESS generates reproduction
tests that can reproduce the original error and help with candidate patch selection. Finally,
AGENTLESS re-ranks all remaining patches and selects one to submit in order to fix the issue.
While AGENTLESS leverages LLMs to perform each detailed task, unlike prior complex
agent-based tools, AGENTLESS does not allow LLMs to autonomously decide future actions or
operate with any complex tools. Our deliberate choice to avoid using agents not only allows
AGENTLESS to have a simplistic and straightforward design that is easy to understand, but
also helps avoid the above-mentioned limitations of LLM agents in software development.
We evaluate AGENTLESS on the popular SWE-bench Lite [23] benchmark and demonstrate
that AGENTLESS not only achieves the highest performance (32.00%) among all open-source
approaches, but also does so at a fraction of the cost!
Furthermore, we performed a fine-grained manual analysis on the SWE-bench Lite dataset
and classified all its problems into different categories across dimensions like problem
description, ground truth patch, and bug location information. Surprisingly, we observed
that SWE-bench Lite contains problems with exact ground truth patch in the description
(4.3%), problems with missing critical information needed to solve the issue (10.0%), and
problems that include misleading solutions in the issue description (5.0%). Recognizing
these issues, we built SWE-bench Lite-S, which removes such problematic problems, and
serves as a more rigorous benchmark to evaluate the ability to solve real-world software
development challenges. Overall, in an era focused on achieving top placements on
leaderboards, our work highlights the overlooked potential of a simplistic, cost-effective
technique in autonomous software development. We hope AGENTLESS will help reset the
baseline, starting point, and horizon for autonomous software agents, and inspire future
work along this crucial direction.
Contributions. In this work, we make the following contributions:
• An agentless approach. We propose AGENTLESS, an agentless approach to automatically
solve software development problems. AGENTLESS leverages LLM-empowered
prompting-based and embedding-based retrieval to perform hierarchical localization.
During repair, AGENTLESS samples multiple candidate patches in a simple diff format
for efficient patch generation. AGENTLESS then generates reproduction tests to verify
that the issue has been resolved. Finally, AGENTLESS leverages both regression tests and
generated reproduction tests to select the final submission patch.
• Extensive evaluation. We evaluate AGENTLESS on the popular SWE-bench Lite dataset
comparing against state-of-the-art agent-based approaches. Our results demonstrates
that AGENTLESS is able to achieve higher performance (32.00%, 96 correct fixes) than
all open-source approaches, with comparably low cost as well. This shows the previously
overlooked potential of a simplistic technique in autonomous software development.
Additionally, AGENTLESS has already been adopted by OpenAI as the go-to approach to showcase
the real-world coding performance of GPT-4o [34] as well as the new o1 model family [74] We
further perform a rigorous ablation study to understand the effectiveness of different
components of AGENTLESS on the final performance.
• SWE-bench Lite-S benchmark. We performed manual classifications on the problems in
the popular SWE-bench Lite dataset. We found that there are problematic problems with
unclear, misleading issue descriptions, as well as problems that contain exact ground
truth patches. To address these issues, we constructed a filtered dataset of SWE-bench
Lite-S that excludes such problematic issues, enabling more rigorous evaluation and
comparison. This has also been confirmed recently by OpenAI, which acknowledged
our benchmark and released SWE-bench Verified [34] along the same direction.
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Agent-based Software Engineering
With the emergence and popularity of agent-based frameworks [92], recently researchers
and industry practitioners have begun developing agent-based approaches to solve
3

software engineering tasks. Devin [7] (and OpenDevin [17], open-source alternative), is
one of the first end-to-end LLM agent-based framework. Devin uses agents to first perform
planning based on user requirement, then allows the agent to use file editor, terminal, and
web search engine tools to iteratively perform the task. SWE-agent [101] designs a custom
agent-computer interface (ACI) that allows the LLM agent to interact with the repository
environment with actions such as reading, editing files, and running bash commands.
Aider [37] first provides a detailed repository map constructed with static and call graph
analysis to the LLM to localize the files that require editing; then it generates a simple diff
format as the editing patch and uses regression testing to verify if the patch is plausible.
Moatless [15] is another open-source agent tool that obtains relevant code locations by
providing the agent with both code search tools as well as retrieval methods using LLM-
constructed queries. Similar to Aider, Moatless also generates a simple diff format as the
final submitted patch. AutoCodeRover [108] further provides the LLM agent with specific
code search APIs (e.g., searching methods in a certain class) to iteratively retrieve code
context and locate the bug locations. SpecRover [81] later improves over AutoCodeRover
and targets specifications (i.e., inferring the intended program behavior) by generating
function summaries and also feedback messages during specific agent steps. Furthermore,
SpecRover also attempts to generate reproduction tests to reproduce the original issue
used to select the final patch. In addition to these highlighted examples, there has been
a plethora of other agent-based approaches developed in both open-source [37, 19, 5, 104]
and close-source/commercial products [29, 30, 64, 13, 9, 1, 16, 58, 4, 22, 20, 12, 14, 10, 2].
Compared to these agent-based techniques, AGENTLESS offers a simplistic, interpretable,
and cost-effective solution to tackle real-world software engineering issues. Different from
agent-based tools, AGENTLESS contains well-defined stages of localization, repair, and
patch validation without letting the LLM agent decide future actions or use complex tools.
AGENTLESS demonstrates for the first time that an agentless approach can achieve very
competitive performance, without the additional baggage of having to provide excessive
tools or model complex environment behavior/feedback.
2.2
Fault Localization and Program Repair
Fault localization (FL) [90] techniques aim to identify the suspicious locations (e.g.,
statements or methods) in source code related to bugs. Dynamic FL techniques mainly
include spectrum-based FL (SBFL) [47, 25, 24] and mutation-based FL (MBFL) [77, 68, 63].
SBFL typically computes source code locations primarily covered by failing tests as more
suspicious than locations primarily covered by passing tests. MBFL further improves
upon that to additionally consider the impact of each source code location on the test
outcomes (measured using mutation testing [76]). Besides dynamic techniques, researchers
have also proposed to directly leverage information retrieval (IR) techniques [85] for
static FL. Such IR-based techniques [87, 82, 88] formulate FL as a search problem and
compare the textual similarity between code elements and the bug report (i.e., query).
Moreover, learning-based techniques have also been proposed to leverage machine learning
to combine multiple sources of dynamic/static information, including DeepFL [54],
FLUCCS [86], and TRANSFER [67]. Recently, researchers have proposed LLM-based
FL [98, 91, 79, 48], which leverages the powerful code and natural language understanding
of modern LLMs to directly localize bugs. Meanwhile, most such LLM-based techniques
either cannot perform repository-level FL due to the limited context window of LLMs [98],
or rely on complicated/costly agentic design to navigate through the codebase [48, 79]. In
contrast, AGENTLESS employs a simplistic hierarchical FL process (based on both LLMs
and IR) to efficiently compute the fine-grained edit locations.
After localizing the bug, the next step is to perform repair. Automated program repair [38]
(APR) has been widely studied to automatically generate patches for bugs. Traditional
APR techniques can be categorized as template-based [57, 39], heuristic-based [51, 50],
and constraint-based [65, 61] tools. While effective, traditional APR tools suffer from
scalability issues and are limited by their patch variety. As such, researchers have proposed
learning-based APR tools either by training NMT (neural machine translation) mod-
els [43, 55, 33, 110] or using pre-trained LLMs to perform repair [96, 94, 49, 106]. Specifically,
LLM-based APR tools, which sample multiple candidate patches per bug, have been shown
4

Project 
Codebase
Repo structure
     ...
     views/
        ._init._.py
        csrf.py
        static.py
        generic/
            detail.py
            ._init._.py
            edit.py
            list.py
      ...
Localize to
Top-N Files
Localize to
Classes &
Functions 
Generate 
Patches
Localization
Repair
LLM
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
1
2
4
6
class Truncator
    def _text_chars
    def _truncate_html
csrf.py
class Handler
    def load_middleware
    def _matrixify 
generic/detail.py
class RegexValidator
    def ._call._
    def ._eq._ 
static.py
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
def edit_matrix():
   if debug and name:
      ... 
class Handler:
   def load_middleware
      ...
class ExtHandler:
   ...
class:Handler 
      ExtHandler
function:edit_matrix
Localize to
Edit 
Locations
if debug and not name:
   method_is_async = 
... 
lines: 120-230
class Handler:
   def load_middleware
...
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
class: Handler
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
Patch+12 -20
Patch+12 -20
Patch+12 -20
5
Embedding
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
Generate 
Reprod.
Tests
test.py
test.py
test.py
def test():
  assert ...
test.py
def test():
  assert ...
Filter&Rank
Patches
9
Patch+12 -20
Patch+12 -20
Submitted
Patch
10
3
7
8
Patch
Validation
Project 
Codebase
Figure 1: Overview of AGENTLESS.
to be the state-of-the-art due to the powerful coding capability of modern LLMs [94]. More
recently, agent-based APR techniques have also been proposed [97, 29, 40, 32, 105]. Inspired
by existing LLM-based APR tools, AGENTLESS samples multiple candidate patches per
issue to maximize the chance of generating a correct fix. Different from most LLM-based
APR techniques, AGENTLESS generates patches using a simple diff format [37] to avoid
generating the complete code and instead focus on producing cost-efficient small edits,
increasing the reliability and accuracy of patch generation (less chances for hallucination).
Furthermore, different from the simplistic bugs studied in most prior work [94], AGENTLESS
targets complex repository-level issues spanning multiple locations.
2.3
LLM-based Test Generation
In addition to localizing and repairing bugs, another research area that has been adopting
LLM is test generation. One area of test generation is fuzz testing [103], also known as
fuzzing, to generate large amounts of inputs in order to expose bugs in systems. Researchers
have applied LLMs to perform fuzzing in domains such as DL libraries [35, 36], OS
Kernel [100, 70], compilers [93, 99, 75], network protocols [66], and mobile applications [59].
LLM-based fuzzers have demonstrated their impact by detecting many bugs not found by
traditional fuzzers as well as unlocking new fuzzing domains. Besides fuzzing, researchers
have also proposed to leverage LLMs for unit test generation to test individual software
units (e.g., methods/classes) [56], such as CodeMosa [52], ChatTester [102], TestPilot [83],
and CoverUp [78].
Bug reproduction is a critical step in investigating bug reports [46], and is integrated
into many recent software engineering agents [17, 81, 10, 14, 9, 101, 27]. For example,
SpecRover [81] begins by generating a test to reproduce the issue described in the bug report;
the test then guides the context retrieval and patching process.Unlike such agent-based
approaches, which generate a reproduction test and rely on an LLM agent to decide whether
the test is correct, AGENTLESS simply executes multiple sampled tests and verifies if the
execution results indicate the issue has been reproduced.
3
AGENTLESS
Approach
Figure 1 shows the overview of AGENTLESS, consisting of three phases: localization,
repair, and patch validation. We first take in the issue description and the existing project
codebase as input. Then, we begin our hierarchical localization process by turning the
5

project codebase into a tree-like structure that illustrates the relative location of each
file in the project
1 . Next, using this repository structure along with the original issue
description, we prompt the LLM to localize and rank the top N most suspicious files that
likely require editing to solve the issue 2 . Since our repository structure format does not
contain detailed source code information, we additionally retrieve files with most relevant
code snippets with the issue description using embedding-based retrieval
3 . We then
combine the retrieved files with the LLM-localized files to obtain the final list of suspicious
files. However, not all contents in each file need to be modified. As such, we provide a
skeleton for each file (i.e., a list of declaration headers of the classes and functions) and
ask the LLM to output a specific list of classes and functions that we should examine
more closely to fix the bug 4 . We then provide the complete code content of the previous
locations and ask the LLM to finalize a smaller set of edit locations (i.e., classes, functions,
or even specific lines) 5 . For the repair phase, we provide the code snippets at these edit
locations together with the issue description and prompt the LLM to sample multiple
patches to solve the issue 6 . Next, we enter the patch validation phase, where we first ask
the LLM to sample multiple reproduction tests that aim to replicate the original issue 7 ,
and then select the optimal one based on actual execution results on the original codebase
8 . AGENTLESS uses the reproduction test along with existing regression tests for patch
ranking/selection 9 . Finally, AGENTLESS selects the top-ranked patch as the final patch
for submission 10. We now describe the steps in each of AGENTLESS’s phases in more detail.
3.1
Localization
To fix or implement a new feature, the first step is to obtain the locations in the source
code, as without the correct locations, it can be impossible to provide the right edits. The
difficulty lies in the fact that there could be hundreds of files with thousands of lines of code
each in a repository, whereas the correct locations to edit are only a few selected lines or
functions. AGENTLESS addresses this by using a simple three-step hierarchical localization
process: 1) localize to suspicious files; 2) localize each selected files into relevant classes,
functions, and variables; 3) localize to code edit locations.
3.1.1
Localize to suspicious files.
First, AGENTLESS narrows down potential locations to specific suspicious files. Instead
of providing the complete code snippet for each file, AGENTLESS constructs a concise
representation of the repository’s file and directory structure, similar to the Linux tree
command. We refer to this as the repository structure format, which begins with the root
folder of the repository and organizes code files or folder names. Files and folders at the
same directory level are aligned vertically, and files/folders in sub-directories are indented.
We recursively traverse the entire repository to obtain the structure, which will be used
as input for the LLM. The repository structure format provides the necessary file paths
alongside the neighboring file names to maintain organizational information in the original
codebase. AGENTLESS then inputs the processed repository structure along with the original
issue description to an LLM, and requests it to identify a list of the top N suspicious files
that need further inspection or modification to resolve the issue.
To compliment the prompting-based localization (using file names only), AGENTLESS
also uses a simple embedding-based retrieval method to identify additional suspicious
files. However, instead of embedding all files in the repository, AGENTLESS first filters out
irrelevant folders. This is done by providing the previously described repository structure
and asking the LLM to produce a list of irrelevant folders that do not need to be further
inspected or modified to resolve the issue. After removing all files from these irrelevant
folders, AGENTLESS divides each remaining file into chunks of code segments and computes
the embedding for each chunk using an embedding model. AGENTLESS then embeds the
original issue description (i.e., the query) and computes the cosine similarity between the
resulting query embedding and each chunk embedding to retrieve a list of relevant files
that contain code segments with the highest similarity to the query. Finally, AGENTLESS
combines the files obtained via prompting with those retrieved via embedding by selecting
top N most common files localized by both, resulting in a final list of relevant files.
6

3.1.2
Localize to related elements.
class UUIDField(CharField):
    default_error_messages = {
        'invalid': _('Enter a valid UUID.'),
    }
    def prepare_value(self, value):
...
    def to_python(self, value):
...
class JSONField(CharField):
    default_error_messages = {
        'invalid': _('Enter a valid JSON.'),
    }
    widget = Textarea
    def ._init._(self, encoder=None, decoder=None):
...
    def to_python(self, value):
    # Process JSON path from the right-hand side
...
def slugify(value, allow_unicode=False):
Figure 2: File skeleton format.
After obtaining the list of suspicious files, AGENTLESS
proceeds to the second part of the localization process:
localize the related elements within these files. Directly
providing the complete context of all files can be large.
As such, AGENTLESS builds a compressed format of each
file that contains the list of class, function, or variable
declarations. We refer to this format as the skeleton for-
mat, with an example shown in Figure 2. In the skeleton
format, we provide only the headers of the classes and
functions in the file. For classes, we further include any
class fields and methods (signatures only). Additionally,
we also keep comments in the class and module level to
provide further information. Compared to providing the
entire file context to the model, the skeleton format is a
much more concise representation, especially when the
file contains thousands of lines, making it impractical/-
costly to process all at once with existing LLMs. We provide the skeleton of all suspicious
files to the LLM at one time in a single prompt, enabling the model to comprehensively ana-
lyze the pertinent information and decide the most relevant elements. Using this input, we
prompt the LLM to provide a list of related classes and functions that one should examine
to fix the provided issue.
3.1.3
Localize to edit locations.
<<<<<<< SEARCH
from flask import Flask
=======
import math
from flask import Flask
>>>>>>> REPLACE
ҎҎɷ 
from flask import Flask
app = Flask(ҎʢnameҎʢ)
@app.route("/")
ҎҎɷ
ҎҎɷ
+ import math
from flask import Flask
app = Flask(ҎʢnameҎʢ)
@app.route("/")
ҎҎɷ
<<<<<<< SEARCH
from flask import Flask
import math
from flask import Flask
>>>>>>> REPLACE
Search/Replace Diff
Original File
+ import math
Generate 
Search/Replace
Diff to fix issue
Issue:
Lambdify misinterprets 
some matrix expressions
Using lambdify on an ... 
Apply diff to 
original file to 
perform edit
Edited File
Figure 3: Search/Replace edit format.
The previous localization step provided us with
a list of related code elements; since we local-
ize top N suspicious files, these localized re-
lated code elements could be from different files.
We now directly provide the code content from
these elements to the LLM and ask it to localize
specific edit locations. Compared to using the
entire file, the input context here is much smaller.
With this input, we then ask the LLM to identify
the final set of edit locations, specified by line
numbers, functions, or classes. Our simple hier-
archical localization allows AGENTLESS to select
a set of relevant code snippets as edit locations
for repair.
3.2
Repair
In the repair stage, the goal is to produce the correct patch to solve the issue. Following
existing work on LLM-based program repair [96, 49, 95, 42], we first utilize the identified
edit locations and construct a context window of code snippets to provide to the LLM
for repair. For example, if the identified location was a class from line 40 to 78, we would
produce a context window of [40 - x, 78 + x] where x denotes the context window size.
The intuition behind adding the additional code before and after the identified location is
to provide the LLM with relevant contextual information for better program repair [96]. If
multiple edit locations are identified, we would concatenate these context windows together
separated with “...” to indicate missing context in the middle.
Using the code snippets, we then ask the LLM to generate patches to solve the issue.
However, instead of directly producing the entire code snippet to replace the entire given
context, AGENTLESS asks the LLM to generate a Search/Replace edit [37]: a simple diff
format to efficiently create each patch. Figure 3 shows an example of the Search/Replace
format containing two main parts: 1) search: the original code snippet we want to replace
and 2) replace: the replacement code snippet we want to replace with. To apply the generated
7

Search/Replace diff to the original file, we can simply match the search code snippet and
replace it with the replacement. This simple diff format avoids generating the complete code
and instead focuses on producing small edits, which are not only more cost-efficient, but
also more reliable and accurate (less chances for hallucination). For each issue, AGENTLESS
uses the LLM to generate multiple potential patches (starting with greedy and then sample
multiple patches with higher temperature).
3.3
Patch Validation
3.3.1
Reproduction test generation.
from sqlfluff import lint
def test__rules__std_L060_raised() _> None:
    try:
        sql = "SELECT   IFNULL(NULL, 100),
            NVL(NULL,100);"
        result = lint(sql, rules=["L060"])
        assert len(result) _= 2
    except:
        print("Other issues")
        return
    try:
        assert result[0]["description"] _= 
"Use 'COALESCE' instead of 'IFNULL'."
        assert result[1]["description"] _= 
"Use 'COALESCE' instead of 'NVL'."
        print("Issue resolved")
    except AssertionError:
        print("Issue reproduced")
        return
    return
test__rules__std_L060_raised()
Figure 4: Example reproduction test.
Since AGENTLESS generates multiple candidate
patches per issue, we need a way to select a final
patch for submission. Please note that under the re-
alistic SWE-bench setup, the original project code-
base can only provide regression tests and not any
reproduction tests (i.e., bug-triggering tests). This is
because the issue has just been raised and the devel-
opers have not added any additional tests to trigger
the issue. As such, different from the Generate-and-
Validate program repair setup [62], we do not have
access to bug-triggering tests.
Following prior work [81, 30], AGENTLESS gener-
ates additional reproduction test to help with patch
selection. More specifically, AGENTLESS leverages
the LLM to synthesize a complete testing file that at-
tempts to both reproduce the original issue described
in the issue description, as well as verify whether the
issue has been fixed. Figure 4 shows an example of
the reproduction test that we want the model to syn-
thesize. If the issue is reproduced, the test outcome
should print Issue reproduced. On the other hand,
the test should output Issue resolved if the issue has been fixed. We also include another
output of Other issues if the test runs into any unexpected issues. To generate the reproduc-
tion test, AGENTLESS provides the original issue description with an example reproduction
test to demonstrate the test format. Similar to repair, we also sample multiple candidate
reproduction tests and then execute each test on the original repository to filter any tests
that do not output Issue reproduced. Finally, we normalize each test (remove comments,
extra spaces, and normalize test names) and then select the test with the highest number of
occurrence as the final reproduction test for each issue.
3.3.2
Patch selection.
Using the generated reproduction tests, we start our patch selection process to pick the final
submission patch. AGENTLESS first runs all the existing tests in the repository to identify a
set of passing tests that successfully pass in the original codebase. However, not all of those
passing tests should be considered as regression tests since solving the issue may require
changing some of the existing functionalities. Therefore, AGENTLESS provides the list of
passing tests to the LLM and ask it to identify any tests that should not be ran to check
if the issue has been correctly fixed (i.e., the tests that may be updated/patched during
issue fixing). After removing the LLM-identified non-regression tests, we obtain a final
set of regression tests. We then run the set of regression tests on all the generated patches.
AGENTLESS then keeps the patches with the lowest number of regression failures. For those
patches, AGENTLESS then runs the selected reproduction test and only keeps patches that
output Issue resolved. Meanwhile, because the reproduction test is generated by the LLM
and can potentially be incorrect/imprecise, it could be possible that no patch can pass the
reproduction test; in that case, AGENTLESS will fall back on only using the regression test
results for selection. AGENTLESS then applies a re-ranking approach using majority voting:
8

We first normalize each patch to ignore surface-level differences (e.g., extra spaces, newlines,
and comments), and then select the patch with the highest number of occurrences as the
final patch for submission. More specifically, to standardize the patch, we begin by parsing
both the old and new code (after applying the patch) into abstract syntax trees. Next, we
unparse the trees into a canonical source code format with docstrings removed. Finally, we
compute the textual diff between the standardized old and new code to get the normalized
patch.
AGENTLESS solves repository-level issues using a simple step-by-step procedure. We note
here that none of the techniques used by AGENTLESS in isolation are revolutionary, but in-
stead AGENTLESS smartly combines existing techniques to construct an easy-to-understand
approach. Different from prior autonomous agent-based tools that involve complex interac-
tions with the environment, AGENTLESS uses a simplistic three-phase approach to localize,
repair, and validate without relying on any agents for decision-making. By conducting
localization in a hierarchical manner, AGENTLESS can efficiently and effectively compute the
fine-grained locations for editing. AGENTLESS then performs repair by sampling multiple
patches using a simple diff format. AGENTLESS’s patch validation approach can further aid
the patch selection process by producing reproduction tests that can help verify if the issue
is fixed.
4
Experimental Setup
Datasets. We evaluate AGENTLESS and baselines using the popular SWE-bench dataset [44]
to test the ability to solve real-world software engineering issues. Each problem in SWE-
bench requires submitting a patch to solve the underlying issue described in the input
issue description. In particular, we focus on the widely used SWE-bench Lite version [23],
containing 300 self-contained problems with better quality. Furthermore, we also conduct
a detailed study (Section 6.1) on the SWE-bench Lite benchmark to not only demonstrate
potential issues and biases, but also produce a more rigorous filtered set of problems for
better evaluation.
Implementation. We implement AGENTLESS using GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-05-13) [72]. By
default, we query the LLM with greedy decoding. During sampling, we use a sampling
temperature of 0.8. For the embedding-based retrieval method, we implement our approach
using LlamaIndex [60]. We use OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-small [73] model to compute the
embedding with chunk size of 512 and chunk overlap of 0. For each issue, we first localize
to the top three suspicious files, and then localize to an unrestricted number of suspicious
classes and functions within these files, all using greedy decoding. Next, to maximize the
chances of finding the correct edit locations, we draw four samples of edit locations per issue
(i.e., the third step in the localization phase). This gives us 4 separate sets of edit locations
per issue. For each set, we adopt a context window of ± 10 lines around each edit location,
and generate 10 patches (1 greedy and 9 samples). This results in a total of 40 patches per
bug. We adopt the same Search/Replace edit format from prior work [37], and use the
built-in Python ast library [18] to perform parsing in our normalization step. To generate the
reproduction tests, we also generate 40 samples (1 greedy and 39 samples) in total prior to
patch selection (described in Section 3.3.1). The regression tests are obtained by first running
all the tests to obtain a set of passing tests that successfully pass in the original repository and
then use the LLM to identify any non-regression tests (described in Section 3.3.2). We do not
directly use the provided list of regression tests already identified in the PASS TO PASS field of
SWE-bench as requested by the SWE-bench maintainers1. We modify the official SWE-bench
evaluation setup to be able to freely execute arbitrary regression and reproduction tests.
Baselines. We compare AGENTLESS against 26 agent-based approaches. These baseline
tools represent the state-of-the-art performance on SWE-bench. We include state-of-the-art
open-source as well as commercial or closed-source baselines (indicated via a
). We note
here that the majority of the closed-source baselines do not provide any trajectories, just
the submission patches. Therefore, we cannot verify the steps taken to arrive at the final
1If we directly use the PASS TO PASS tests the performance on SWE-bench Lite will be 98.
9

patches. Moreover, we also include a simple agentless baseline using retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) proposed as part of SWE-bench [44] for comparison. In this case, the
agentless baseline uses the LLM to directly generate a patch file by providing it with the file
content of the most relevant files, retrieved using BM25 [80].
Metrics. Following prior work [108], we report 1) % Resolved: the percentage of resolved
problems in the benchmark, 2) Avg. $ Cost: average inference cost of running the tool,
and 3) Avg. # Tokens: average number of input and output tokens used to query to LLM.
Additionally, we also report the % Correct Location: the percent of problems where the
patch produced by the tool covers the edit location(s) of the ground truth developer patch.
We compute this metric over three granularities: file, function, and line. We report that
a patch contains the correct location if it edits a superset of all locations in the ground
truth patch. For baseline tools, we directly use the reported results either from the official
leaderboard [45] or from the tool’s official paper/repository.
5
Evaluation
Table 1: Results on SWE-bench Lite. Note:
indicates approaches that are closed-source (i.e.,
source code is not released).
indicates approaches built on top of an earlier version of our
AGENTLESS. '-' indicates that the relevant information to compute this has not been released.
indicates that multiple models are used, but some of them are not specified. Claude 3.5 S
is short for Claude 3.5 Sonnet.
Tool
LLM
% Resolved
Avg.
$ Cost
Avg.
# Tokens
% Correct Location
Line
Function
File
CodeStory Aide [2]
GPT-4o+
Claude 3.5 S
129 (43.00%)
-
-
41.7%
58.7%
72.0%
Bytedance MarsCode [58]
NA
118 (39.33%)
-
-
42.7%
58.0%
79.7%
Honeycomb [10]
NA
115 (38.33%)
-
-
44.3%
57.0%
69.3%
MentatBot [14]
GPT-4o
114 (38.00%)
-
-
37.3%
53.3%
69.3%
Gru [20]
NA
107 (35.67%)
-
-
38.3%
54.3%
75.0%
Isoform [12]
NA
105 (35.00%)
-
41,963
38.7%
55.3%
72.0%
SuperCoder2.0 [22]
NA
102 (34.00%)
-
-
41.7%
63.7%
65.7%
Alibaba Lingma Agent [13]
GPT-4o+
Claude 3.5 S
99 (33.00%)
-
-
40.0%
58.7%
75.0%
Factory Code Droid [9]
NA
94 (31.33%)
-
-
36.7%
55.7%
72.7%
Amazon Q Developer-v2 [4]
NA
89 (29.67%)
-
-
40.3%
52.0%
74.3%
SpecRover [81]
GPT-4o+
Claude 3.5 S
93 (31.00%)
$0.65
-
-
-
-
CodeR [30]
GPT-4
85 (28.33%)
$3.34
323,802
35.7%
52.3%
67.0%
MASAI [27]
NA
84 (28.00%)
-
-
38.7%
56.3%
75.0%
SIMA [3]
GPT-4o
83 (27.67%)
$0.82
-
37.0%
54.0%
79.0%
IBM Research Agent-101 [1]
NA
80 (26.67%)
-
-
39.7%
56.7%
73.3%
OpenCSG StarShip [16]
GPT-4
71 (23.67%)
-
-
39.0%
61.7%
90.7%
Amazon Q Developer [4]
NA
61 (20.33%)
-
-
34.0%
43.7%
71.7%
RepoUnderstander [64]
GPT-4
64 (21.33%)
-
-
-
-
-
AutoCodeRover-v2 [6]
GPT-4o
92 (30.67%)
-
-
35.0%
52.3%
69.3%
RepoGraph [19]
GPT-4o
89 (29.67%)
-
-
36.7%
51.3%
71.0%
Moatless [15]
Claude 3.5 S
80 (26.67%)
$0.17
-
38.7%
54.7%
78.7%
GPT-4o
74 (24.67%)
$0.14
-
36.0%
52.0%
73.0%
OpenDevin+CodeAct v1.8 [17]
Claude 3.5 S
80 (26.67%)
$1.14
-
38.0%
49.7%
67.3%
Aider [37]
GPT-4o+
Claude 3.5 S
79 (26.33%)
-
-
35.3%
50.0%
69.7%
SWE-agent [101]
Claude 3.5 S
69 (23.00%)
$1.62
521,208
40.7%
54.3%
72.0%
GPT-4o
55 (18.33%)
$2.53
498,346
29.3%
42.3%
58.3%
GPT-4
54 (18.00%)
$2.51
245,008
30.7%
45.3%
61.0%
AppMap Navie [5]
GPT-4o
65 (21.67%)
-
-
29.7%
44.7%
59.7%
AutoCodeRover [108]
GPT-4
57 (19.00%)
$0.45
38,663
29.0%
42.3%
62.3%
RAG [101]
Claude 3 Opus
13 (4.33%)
$0.25
-
22.0%
30.0%
57.0%
GPT-4
8 (2.67%)
$0.13
-
12.7%
23.3%
47.3%
Claude-2
9 (3.00%)
-
-
16.7%
24.3%
46.7%
GPT-3.5
1 (0.33%)
-
-
6.3%
11.3%
27.3%
AGENTLESS
GPT-4o
96 (32.00%)
$0.70
78,166
35.3%
52.0%
69.7%
5.1
Performance on SWE-bench Lite
Table 1 shows the main evaluation result of AGENTLESS and prior agent-based approaches
on SWE-bench Lite. We observe that AGENTLESS is able to solve 96 out of 300 problems
(32.00%). While this is not the highest percentage of problems solved on SWE-bench Lite,
AGENTLESS is extremely competitive compared with prior agent-based approaches while
10

using a much simpler design and overall technique. It is important to note here that many
of the top techniques are closed-source/commercial and did not release any source code
to reproduce experiments or even trajectories for further verification. Compared with all
open-source approaches, AGENTLESS is able to achieve the highest performance of 32.00%
(96 / 300) on SWE-bench Lite. Additionally, AGENTLESS only costs on average $0.70, which
is less than most prior agent-based approaches. Comparing against the RAG agentless
baselines, we see that while AGENTLESS costs slightly more, AGENTLESS is also able to fix
way more issues.
5.1.1
Unique issues fixed.
26
1
5
0
10
0
2
4
6
0
4
0
6
0
3
3
10
0
3
0
11
0
7
0
8
0
11
0
16
0
60
closed-source
CodeStoryAide
MarsCode
Honeycomb
Agentless
Others
25
2
3
2
9
0
0
1
3
2
12
0
3
0
7
2
8
2
3
0
10
0
6
0
0
1
17
0
2
0
41
open-source
AutoCodeRover-v2
RepoGraph
Moatless-claude3
Agentless
Others
Figure 5: Venn diagram for issue fixes.
Figure 5 shows the unique issues
solved by AGENTLESS compared with
the
top-performing
closed-source
/ commercial and open-source ap-
proaches (“Others” indicates all other
approaches
within each category).
First, we see that compared to the
open-source agent-based tools, AGENT-
LESS is able to fix 2 issues that no
other tools can resolve, showing the
success of using a simple agentless
approach in solving difficult issues.
Furthermore, even when compared
with
high-performing
commercial
approaches, AGENTLESS is still able
to offer a unique fix. This low number
of unique fixes can be attributed to the
fact there are already tools built on top of earlier versions of AGENTLESS (e.g., Isoform [12])
or partly inspired by AGENTLESS (e.g., Bytedance MarsCode [58]), thereby reducing the
unique issues resolved by AGENTLESS. Nevertheless, our results show that AGENTLESS can
be competitive/complementary compared to existing agents.
5.1.2
Localization performance.
In real-world software development, apart from directly fixing the issue, providing the
correct edit location to developers is extremely helpful for debugging. As such, we examine
the locations of the patches generated by each technique compared with the ground truth
patch. We note here that it is possible to fix a bug in a different location than the ground
truth, however comparing against the ground truth patch can still serve as an approximate
measure. Table 1 additionally shows the percentage of submitted patches with correct loca-
tions for each tool, across line, function, and file levels. We first observe that the percentage
of patches with correct locations correlates heavily with the solve rate. Interestingly, the
highest result for file-level location is OpenCSG StarShip at 90.0%, significantly higher than
even the best-performing approaches while at the same time having a relatively low solve
rate (23.67%). As OpenCSG StarShip is a commercial product that does not provide source
code or detailed trajectories, it is difficult to explain this huge difference between localization
and repair performance. In terms of localization performance, by using our simple hierarchi-
cal approach, AGENTLESS remains very competitive compared with previous agent-based
approaches.
5.1.3
Reproduction test results.
AGENTLESS uses regression and generated reproduction tests to perform filtering in order
to select the final submission patch. Therefore, we evaluate the quality of our generated
reproduction tests. We note here that as described in Section 3.3.1, we only use the gen-
erated reproduction test if it can successfully reproduce the original issue in the original
repository. Out of the 300 problems in SWE-bench Lite, AGENTLESS is able to produce 213
reproduction tests that output the required reproduction message when evaluated on the
11

original repository. However, these tests might still be incorrect as a correct reproduction
should also be able to verify that the issue has been correctly resolved. To evaluate this,
we directly apply the ground truth patch provided in SWE-bench2. We found that only 94
tests correctly output the Issues resolved message after applying the ground truth patches.
This steep drop-off can be partially explained as sometimes the issue description provided
in the problem may not contain enough information to generate complete test cases for
validating a correct solution. However, this problem is partially mitigated as AGENTLESS
takes a conservative approach of requiring all patches to pass the regression test suite first
and will remove a patch if it cannot pass the regression tests but passes on the generated
reproduction test. This reduces the likelihood of an incorrect reproduction test selecting
a correct patch. Furthermore, if all generated patches cannot pass the reproduction test,
AGENTLESS will fall back on only using the regression test results for selection. In Sec-
tion 5.2.3 we closely examine the impact of using both regression and reproduction test for
patch selection has on the performance.
5.1.4
Adoption of AGENTLESS.
Table 2: Performance of different localization steps.
Method
Contains GT
LoC
Avg. $
File level localization
Prompting-based
78.67%
3,221
$0.02
Embedding-based
(w/o irrelevant filtering)
67.67%
3,388
$0.05
Embedding-based
(w/ irrelevant filtering)
70.33%
3,622
$0.04
Combined
81.67%
3,424
$0.06
Related element localization
Complete file
53.67%
778
$0.15
Skeleton format
58.33%
698
$0.02
Edit location localization
Greedy
50.67%
189
$0.06
Direct from file-level
47.00%
208
$0.18
Multi-samples merged
56.33%
342
$0.07
Multi-samples
49.67%
165
$0.07
49.33%
180
49.33%
168
48.33%
213
Although
released
very
recently,
AGENTLESS
has
already
received
widespread adoption. In Table 1, there
are two baseline tools (indicated via
) already built upon earlier versions
of our AGENTLESS: RepoGraph [19]
is an open-source tool combining
AGENTLESS
with
repository-level
graph, while Isoform [12] is a closed-
source commercial tool also built upon
AGENTLESS. Additionally, Bytedance
MarsCode [58] is partly inspired by
AGENTLESS in patch sampling/se-
lection and OpenDevin [17] is in the
process of integrating AGENTLESS
into their ecosystem. Furthermore,
AGENTLESS has also been adopted by
OpenAI as the default approach when
showcasing the real-world coding
performance of GPT-4o on their new
SWE-bench Verified benchmark [34],
where AGENTLESS also achieves the
best performance compared with all other studied agent-based solutions. At the time of
finishing up this draft, OpenAI just released the new o1 model family and also adopted
AGENTLESS as the top/default approach to showcase their performance on SWE-bench [74].
5.2
Ablation study on components of AGENTLESS
Next, we look at how each component in the localization, repair, and patch validation phases
contributed to the final AGENTLESS performance. Unless otherwise specified, we vary the
configuration of one component while using the default parameters for all other settings.
5.2.1
Localization ablation.
Table 2 shows the performance and cost for each of the 3 steps in AGENTLESS’s localization
phase. We show after each localization step the percentage of problems whose ground truth
edit locations remain in the location set (“Contains GT”), the average lines of code of each
location set (“LoC”), and the average dollar cost of each step (“Avg.$”). The bold method
indicates the default setting of AGENTLESS. First, we examine the different configurations
2Note that the ground truth patch is only applied here to evaluate the test quality, and is not used
during the AGENTLESS process for selecting the reproduction tests.
12

of file level localization. To start with, for the retrieval method based on embeddings, we
see that without including the irrelevant folder filtering to remove irrelevant folders for
embedding (described in Section 3.1.1), both the performance and cost become worse. This
demonstrates the importance of limiting the number of files to consider during embedding
and focusing on essential parts of the repository for more cost-efficient and effective local-
ization. We see that using the prompting-based or the embedding-based retrieval method
alone can locate the ground truth file in 78.7% and 67.7% of cases respectively. This can be
further improved by combining them to obtain 81.7% correct file localization, showing that
prompting-based and embedding-based retrieval methods can complement each other in
identifying different sets of relevant files.
Table 3: Performance of different repair setups.
Method
Performance
Avg. $
Greedy location
(40 samples)
88 (29.33%)
$0.22
Multi-samples merged
(40 samples)
85 (28.33%)
$0.24
Multi-samples
(4 x 10 samples)
96 (32.00%)
$0.29
Using all of the localized files leads to
a large context window (>3000). As
such, in our second localization step,
we localize to the relevant classes and
functions, and are able to drastically re-
duce the context window (<800). We
compare our input of using skeleton
format (described in Section 3.1.2) to
provide a more concise representation
with the baseline of using the complete
file content. We observe that by using
the complete file content, not only is the cost much higher but also the number of localized
groundtruth issues is reduced. The reason is most likely that LLMs cannot handle long
context very well, so providing the entire file contents can confuse the model. Conversely,
by using a more concise representation as the input, we can effectively localize the correct
related locations that are needed for inspection and editing.
Next, AGENTLESS localizes to the exact edit locations needed to achieve even more context
reduction without losing much of the localization accuracy. We compare the different ways
we can perform the edit location localization: 1) “Greedy”: using greedy decoding to obtain
one set of edit locations, 2) “Direct from file-level”: directly go from file-level localization to
the edit locations (instead the default of localizing from file-level to related elements and
then to edit locations), 3) “Multi-samples merged”: sample multiple sets of edit locations and
merging them into one set, and 4) “Multi-samples”: sample multiple sets of edit locations.
We first observe that by directly going from file-level to the edit locations, both the cost
and performance are worse. The reason is that the model can become confused when
providing a large context, demonstrating the importance of our hierarchical localization
design. We also find that when merging multiple samples together, the amount of ground
truth localized is higher but at the expense of having to add more context as the input during
the repair phase. Our default settings also sample the edit locations multiple times, however
instead of merging, we perform repair on them separately to make use of the fact each
sampled location set can provide similar localization performance while also limiting the
input context. In short, by using hierarchical localization steps, AGENTLESS can successfully
minimize the cost while performing effective localization.
5.2.2
Repair ablation.
We now look at the impact of our different repair setups on the final performance. Table 3
shows the different settings and inputs for our repair phase with their performance and
cost.Starting with using the greedy location set generated in the edit location generation
stage, we observe that we can already achieve very high performance of more than 88 issues
fixed. Similarly, for the “Multi-samples merged” where we merged multiple location sets
into one, we can also achieve comparable performance. The performance can be further
improved by considering each sampled locations separately (to generate 10 candidate
patches each) when performing repair to achieve 96 fixes. The reason is that each different
location sets may localize different ground truth locations and provide different context
that can be helpful to fix specific issues. By using different edit locations and combining
with our extensive test filtering and selection stage, AGENTLESS can drastically improve the
repair performance.
13

4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
# of samples
80
90
100
110
120
# of issues fixed
Agentless
all sample
Figure 6: Repair performance as the
number of patch samples increases.
Next, we examine the impact of using different num-
bers of sampled candidate patches on the perfor-
mance of AGENTLESS. Figure 6 shows the number of
issues fixed as we increase the number of samples.
Note that the sample interval increases by 4 since we
use 4 different sets of locations as input. First, we
see that by just using 1 greedy sample for each loca-
tion set, AGENTLESS can already achieve a significant
number of correct fixes of 80. We can continue to im-
prove repair performance by adding more samples.
However, we observe that the performance plateaus
at around 40 samples where adding additional candi-
date patches does not improve performance. This is
because we perform majority voting after test filter-
ing to select the final submission patch, which means
that later samples may be ignored since it is difficult
for them to offset the majoritively voted patch. Interestingly, we can also see from the figure
that if we consider all patch samples (instead of only selecting one patch) for each issue, the total
number of possible issues that AGENTLESS can solve is 126 (42.0%). This shows a high upper
bound for the potential of AGENTLESS with future work being even better patch re-ranking
and selection techniques to further improve the overall performance.
5.2.3
Patch validation ablation.
Table 4: Performance of different patch
selection.
Method
Performance
Avg. $
Majority voting
77 (25.67%)
$0.00
+Regression test
81 (27.00%)
$0.01
+Reproduction test
96 (32.00%)
$0.25
Finally, we examine the impact of our different
test generation and patch selection configura-
tions has on performance. Table 4 shows the re-
sult and additional cost of different approaches.
We see that by only using majority voting, we
can already achieve 77 correct fixes. By adding
the existing regression tests, and filter for candi-
date patches with the lowest amount of regres-
sion errors, we can improve performance to 81
issues resolved. Furthermore, the most signifi-
cant performance improvement was achieved by incorporating additional filtering based on
the generated reproduction tests, resulting in the final AGENTLESS performance of 96 fixes.
This demonstrates the impact of our patch selection approach, specifically our reproduction
test generation, which is able to make use of the high number of candidate patches generated
and filter for the correct patch for final submission. However, using reproduction tests also
comes with additional costs as AGENTLESS needs to generate these tests which are not
provided in the original project repository.
1
5
10
20
40
# of samples
85
90
95
100
105
110
# of issues fixed
75
100
125
150
175
200
# of issues with tests
selected reproduction tests
plausible reproduction tests
Figure 7: Reproduction test and re-
pair results as number of samples in-
creases.
Next, we look at our reproduction test generation
strategy. Figure 7 shows the repair performance (bar,
left axis), the total number of selected and plausible
reproduction tests (lines, right axis) as we increase
the number of candidate reproduction tests gener-
ated per issue. Recall that we only select the repro-
duction test if it can successfully output the Issue
reproduced message when evaluated on the original
repository. We further consider a selected reproduc-
tion test as plausible if it can successfully verify that
the ground truth developer patch has fixed the origi-
nal issue (i.e., output Issue resolved). To begin with,
when we only generate one reproduction test (i.e.,
using the greedy output) per issue, we only produce
100 selected tests for all 300 issues in SWE-bench
Lite with the repair performance being 90. We can
increase the number of selected reproduction tests by increasing the number of candidate re-
14

production tests we generate. However, it is interesting to note that the number of plausible
reproduction tests does not increase drastically (apart from going from 1 to 5 samples). The
reason again is due to some ambiguity in the issue description where it may not contain
sufficient information to reproduce and verify the issue has been resolved. Nevertheless, we
observe a small improvement in the number of issues resolved, reaching final performance
of 96 correct fixes as we increase the number of candidate reproduction tests to 40 per issue.
6
Additional Analysis on SWE-bench Lite
6.1
Problem Classification
Contains
partial
reproducible
example
8.7%
Contains
reproducible
example
54.3%
Info in NL
27.0%
Not
enough
info
10.0%
(a) Description quality
Some steps in NL
7.7%
No solution
73.3%
Misleading
5.0%
Exact patch
4.3%
Complete steps in NL
9.7%
(b) Solution in description
Line
Function
File
Overall
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage
90.3%
68.0%
50.0%
39.3%
3.0%
6.7%
13.7%
13.7%
6.7%
13.7%
15.3%
24.7%
11.7%
21.0%
22.3%
None
Stack trace
Natural language
Keywords
(c) Location information
Figure 8: Categorization and corresponding breakdown of the SWE-bench Lite problems.
We now take a closer look at the problems in SWE-bench Lite. We first classify the existing
problems to gain better understanding and additional insights on exactly what types of
problems AGENTLESS and prior approaches can solve. Specifically, we perform manual
classification based on the issue description and ground truth developer patch of each
problem. Below describes each of classification dimensions and their categories in more
detail:
1) Description quality. We first inspect whether each issue description contains sufficient
information to perform the desired task. Figure 8a shows the distribution of each category: (i)
contains enough information in natural language, (ii) contains reproducible failure example,
(iii) contains partially reproducible example, and (iv) does not contain enough informa-
tion.We observe that while a majority of the tasks in SWE-bench Lite contains sufficient
information, with many having some small failure examples to showcase the bug, there
is a non-trivial percentage (10.0%) of problems which do not contain enough information.
Such problems include those that require implementing a new function with a specific name
or adding an error message with a specific string that was not provided in the problem
description.3 This means the test will fail if the function name or error message string does
not match exactly, even if the underlying functionality is correctly implemented. Another
example of insufficient information are problems that have multiple different interpretations
on how to solve the issue, and only a subset of them can pass the ground truth test. For
instance, the issue description will outline two possible solutions suggestions with only one
of them aligned well with developer intention. Implementing the other proposed solution
suggestion will lead to test failure. This highlights the necessity to further sanitize/improve
SWE-bench Lite where these problems with uninformative descriptions shall be further
excluded.
2) Solution in description. We also examine whether the solution or steps to solve the
problem are already provided in the issue description. Figure 8b shows the breakdown of
our categories: (i) no solution or steps provided, (ii) partial solution provided (e.g., some
steps in natural language), (iii) complete solution provided (e.g., complete steps in natural
3These types of problems still exist in the benchmark despite claims that they have been completely
removed by the filtering process according to SWE-bench Lite.
15

language), (iv) exact patch provided, and (v) misleading solution or steps. Interestingly, we
observe that 4.3% of issues contain the exact ground truth patch in the issue description,
while an additional 9.7% of issues describe the exact steps required to come up with the
correct solution. This shows that certain problems in SWE-bench Lite can be much easier
to solve since they provide the solution either in exact code snippets or natural language.
Furthermore, we also observe 5.0% of issues contain proposed solution or steps in the issue
description that do not reflect the ground truth patch introduced by the developers. This
further highlights potential issues with the benchmark, as these discrepancies can mislead
tools to generate incorrect solutions simply by following the issue description.
3) Location information. We further check if the issues description contains the correct
location information. We divide the granularity into line, function, and file level. Our
categories are: (i) exact locations in natural language, (ii) exact locations provided in failure
stack traces, iii) related keywords in the issue description that can be used to search for the
location, and (iv) not provided. We first observe that only in very few cases (<10%), the
issue provides the exact lines needed to fix the bug. However, this number increases as we
increase the granularity to functions and files where we found that around half of the issues
already provide the location of the file needed to be edited in the description. To repair a bug
or introduce a new feature, finding the location to make the edit is extremely important. As
such, we leverage this classification and focus our later analysis on the effect the provided
location has on the repair performance of AGENTLESS and baseline approaches.
These classification dimensions and categories raise potential issues with the SWE-bench
Lite problems such as unsolvable questions, misleading potential solutions, and significant
differences in problem difficulties. These issues have not been properly considered by either
the benchmark creation process or prior approaches. Furthermore, we hope our classification
can provide additional insights on the type of problems that can be solved by existing and
future approaches.
6.2
SWE-bench Lite-S
Building on the above problem classifications, we will more rigorously compare and con-
trast AGENTLESS and existing work. Specifically, we focus on a subset of the problems in
SWE-bench Lite after removing the problems that contain the exact patch in the problem
description, misleading solutions, or do not provide enough information in the original
issue description. This eliminates the less reasonable problems and normalizes the difficulty
level of the benchmark. We refer to our subset of 249 problems as SWE-bench Lite-S. We
note here that our approach of identifying and excluding problematic problems has already
been confirmed by a later work done by OpenAI, where they have released a similar filtered
benchmark of SWE-bench Verified [34].
Table 5 shows the results on the SWE-bench Lite-S benchmark and the corresponding
ranking of each approach. We also included the results on the original 300 problems in
SWE-bench Lite for comparison. While the general ranking of all approaches stay roughly
the same, we do observe some small ranking changes. Compared to the original SWE-bench
Lite, our filtered benchmark of SWE-bench Lite-S provides a more accurate reflection of the
true capability of autonomous software development tools.
Using the classification results, we further examine the types of problems that are solved
by AGENTLESS and prior approaches on SWE-bench Lite-S. Figure 9 shows the solve rate
of various top-performing open-source and closed-source approaches across the different
categories of problems. We first examine if having code examples to reproduce the error
in the issue description can help the LLM better solve the issue in Figure 9a. Surprisingly,
we found that the solve rate of all prior approaches drop when evaluated on the problems
with reproducible code examples. Many agent-based approaches [101, 17, 30] attempt to
first reproduce the error, however, this may not improve performance even on problems
with already provided reproducible examples. However, we observe the performance for
AGENTLESS remains very high on the problems with reproducible code examples. This is
because AGENTLESS generates reproduction tests using the original issues descriptions,
hence can better make use of the reproducible code examples provided (similarly for
16

Table 5: Performance and ranking on SWE-bench Lite-S. * indicates a tie in ranking.
Tool
LLM
SWE-bench Lite
SWE-bench Lite-S
% Resolved
Rank
% Resolved
Rank
CodeStory Aide [2]
GPT-4o+
Claude 3.5 S
129 (43.00%)
1
114 (45.78%)
1
Bytedance MarsCode [58]
NA
118 (39.33%)
2
106 (42.57%)
2
Honeycomb [10]
NA
115 (38.33%)
3
98 (39.36%)
3
MentatBot [14]
GPT-4o
114 (38.00%)
4
96 (38.55%)
4
Gru [20]
NA
107 (35.67%)
5
94 (37.75%)
5
Isoform [12]
NA
105 (35.00%)
6
91 (36.55%)
6
SuperCoder2.0 [22]
NA
102 (34.00%)
7
87 (34.94%)
7
Alibaba Lingma Agent [13]
GPT-4o+
Claude 3.5 S
99 (33.00%)
8
86 (34.54%)
8
Factory Code Droid [9]
NA
94 (31.33%)
10
82 (32.93%)
10
Amazon Q Developer-v2 [4]
NA
89 (29.67%)
12*
76 (30.52%)
13
CodeR [30]
GPT-4
85 (28.33%)
14
71 (28.51%)
14*
MASAI [27]
NA
84 (28.00%)
15
70 (28.11%)
16
SIMA [3]
GPT-4o
83 (27.67%)
16
71 (28.51%)
14*
IBM Research Agent-101 [1]
NA
80 (26.67%)
17*
66 (26.51%)
18*
OpenCSG StarShip [16]
GPT-4
71 (23.67%)
22
56 (22.49%)
23*
Amazon Q Developer [4]
NA
61 (20.33%)
26
51 (20.48%)
25*
RepoUnderstander [64]
GPT-4
64 (21.33%)
25
51 (20.48%)
25*
AutoCodeRover-v2 [6]
GPT-4o
92 (30.67%)
11
79 (31.73%)
11
RepoGraph [19]
GPT-4o
89 (29.67%)
12*
77 (30.92%)
12
Moatless [15]
Claude 3.5 S
80 (26.67%)
17*
67 (26.91%)
17
GPT-4o
74 (24.67%)
21
62 (24.90%)
21
OpenDevin+CodeAct v1.8 [17]
Claude 3.5 S
80 (26.67%)
17*
65 (26.10%)
20
Aider [37]
GPT-4o+
Claude 3.5 S
79 (26.33%)
20
66 (26.51%)
18*
SWE-agent [101]
Claude 3.5 S
69 (23.00%)
23
58 (23.29%)
22
GPT-4o
55 (18.33%)
28
45 (18.07%)
27*
GPT-4
54 (18.00%)
29
42 (16.87%)
29
AppMap Navie [5]
GPT-4o
65 (21.67%)
24
56 (22.49%)
23*
AutoCodeRover [108]
GPT-4
57 (19.00%)
27
45 (18.07%)
27*
RAG [101]
Claude 3 Opus
13 (4.33%)
30
10 (4.02%)
30
GPT-4
8 (2.67%)
32
5 (2.01%)
32
Claude-2
9 (3.00%)
31
6 (2.41%)
31
GPT-3.5
1 (0.33%)
33
0 (0.00%)
33
AGENTLESS
GPT-4o
96 (32.00%)
9
84 (33.73%)
9
AutoCodeRover-v2
RepoGraph
Moatless
-Claude-3.5
CodeStoryAide
MarsCode
Honeycomb
Agentless
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Solve rate
w/o reproducible examples
w/ reproducible examples
(a) Description quality
AutoCodeRover-v2
RepoGraph
Moatless
-Claude-3.5
CodeStoryAide
MarsCode
Honeycomb
Agentless
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Solve rate
contains NL steps
without steps
(b) Solution in description
AutoCodeRover-v2
RepoGraph
Moatless
-Claude-3.5
CodeStoryAide
MarsCode
Honeycomb
Agentless
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Solve rate
in NL
in stack trace
keywords
none
(c) Location information
Figure 9: Solve rate of selected approaches (orange means open-source while indigo means
closed-source) on different problem categories in SWE-bench Lite-S. Red dotted line indi-
cates the average solve rate on the entire SWE-bench Lite-S for each approach.
MentatBot which also contains an explicit test generation step). This demonstrate the
importance of the test generation stage for patch selection. Next, we look at the effect of
ground truth patch/solution in the issue description. Figure 9b shows the expected result
where all selected techniques perform better on issues that already provide solution steps
in natural language. Furthermore, in Figure 9c, we examine the solve rate with respect to
the location information provided in the issues description. Unsurprisingly, we found that
the highest solve rates are on problems where the location is provided in natural language
followed by stack traces. The most difficult problems are those that do not contain any
clues about the location of the issue in the description. We observe that compared with
closed-source approaches, AGENTLESS performs comparably when the location is provided
in either natural language, stack trace, or keywords. However, the closed-source agent tools
17

perform better compared to AGENTLESS in the case where no location clue is provided.
This highlights an advantage of agent-based tools in solving these more complex problems
where they are able to use complex code search tools. This represents potential future work
for AGENTLESS to target and further improve these types of problems.
6.3
SWE-bench Verified
Table 6: Performance on SWE-bench Verified.
Tool
LLM
% Resolved
Tools [11]
Claude 3.5 Sonnet (20241022)
245 (49.00%)
Claude 3.5 Haiku
203 (40.60%)
Solver [21]
NA
227 (45.40%)
Gru [20]
NA
226 (45.20%)
Honeycomb [10]
NA
203 (40.60%)
Amazon Q Developer-v2 [4]
NA
194 (38.80%)
Factory Code Droid [9]
NA
185 (37.00%)
Amazon Q Developer [4]
NA
128 (25.60%)
Composio SWEkit [8]
Claude 3.5 Sonnet
203 (40.60%)
AutoCodeRover-v2 [6]
GPT-4o
192 (38.40%)
SWE-agent [101]
Claude 3.5 Sonnet
168 (33.60%)
GPT-4o
116 (23.20%)
GPT-4
112 (22.40%)
Alibaba Lingma Agent [13]
Lingma SWE-GPT 72b
144 (28.80%)
AppMap Navie [5]
GPT-4o
131 (26.20%)
AGENTLESS
GPT-4o
194 (38.80%)
Similar to SWE-bench Lite-S and inspired by similar concerns in Section 6.1, OpenAI
has produced a newly filtered dataset of SWE-bench Verified [34] validated by human
developers to ensure each issue has sufficient amounts of information to be solved. Table 6
shows the performance of AGENTLESS compared with prior agent-based approaches on
SWE-bench Verified. Similar to the results on SWE-bench Lite, AGENTLESS maintains its
strong performance and is able to solve 194 out of 500 problems (38.80%). AGENTLESS is
able to achieve the second highest performance compared with open-source approaches
and perform better than many closed-source / commercial techniques. Furthermore, we
note that AGENTLESS performs the best among all techniques that use GPT-4o as the LLM.
7
Threats to Validity
Internal. One threat to validity comes from the data leakage of ground truth developer
patches in SWE-bench Lite being part of the training data for GPT-4o. Since GPT-4o is a
closed-source model, we do not have access to the training data. Meanwhile, we note here
that prior work almost exclusively used similar closed-source LLMs (e.g., GPT-4o, GPT-4,
Claude-3.5, etc), and our approach can outperform all existing open-source solutions with
same models. Furthermore, the authors of SWE-bench [44] compared the resolve rate of
issues collected before and after the knowledge cutoff date of GPT-4, and did not find any
significant difference. To completely address this threat, we would need to retrain GPT-4o
from scratch which would be infeasible for an academic project.
External. One main external threat comes from our evaluation dataset of SWE-bench Lite.
While the performance of AGENTLESS might not generalize to other datasets, SWE-bench
Lite is by far the most popular evaluation dataset which contains a diverse range of problems.
In addition, OpenAI has independently performed an extensive evaluation of AGENTLESS and
other open-source solutions on SWE-bench Lite, SWE-bench, and their new SWE-bench
Verified benchmark, further confirming that AGENTLESS outperforms all other open-source
agents [34]. Moreover, on Sept. 12th 2024, OpenAI just released the new o1 model family
and also adopted Agentless as the top approach to showcase their performance on SWE-
bench [74]. In the future, we plan to further address this threat by evaluating AGENTLESS
on other benchmarks.
18
