Merge, Ensemble, and Cooperate! A Survey on Collaborative Strategies in
the Era of Large Language Models
Jinliang Lu1,2∗, Ziliang Pang1∗, Min Xiao1,2∗, Yaochen Zhu3 *, Rui Xia3, Jiajun Zhang1,2,4 †
1Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
4Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan, China
{lujinliang2019, ziliang.pang}@ia.ac.cn,
{yczhu, rxia}@njust.edu.cn, {jjzhang, min.xiao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
The remarkable success of Large Language
Models (LLMs) has ushered natural language
processing (NLP) research into a new era. De-
spite their diverse capabilities, LLMs trained on
different corpora exhibit varying strengths and
weaknesses, leading to challenges in maximiz-
ing their overall efficiency and versatility. To
address these challenges, recent studies have ex-
plored collaborative strategies for LLMs. This
paper provides a comprehensive overview of
this emerging research area, highlighting the
motivation behind such collaborations. Specifi-
cally, we categorize collaborative strategies into
three primary approaches: Merging, Ensemble,
and Cooperation. Merging involves integrating
multiple LLMs in the parameter space. En-
semble combines the outputs of various LLMs.
Cooperation leverages different LLMs to allow
full play to their diverse capabilities for spe-
cific tasks. We provide in-depth introductions
to these methods from different perspectives
and discuss their potential applications. Addi-
tionally, we outline future research directions,
hoping this work will catalyze further studies
on LLM collaborations and paving the way for
advanced NLP applications.
1
Introduction
"Many hands make light work."
—– John Heywood
Human beings have long understood the power of
collaboration. When individuals pool their diverse
skills and efforts, they can achieve far more than
they could alone. This principle of collective effort
has found new relevance in the realm of machine
learning (Dietterich, 2000; Panait and Luke, 2005;
Sagi and Rokach, 2018), significantly boosting the
development of artificial intelligence.
In recent years, large language models (LLMs)
(Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023) have
*Equal Contribution
†Corresponding author
PaLM-1/2
Qwen - 1/1.5/2
LLaMA-Chat
LLaMA - 1/2/3
LLaMA-Guard
CodeX
GPT-3
CodeLLaMA
Gemma
Flan-T5
GPT-4
ChatGPT
Qwen-Multilingual
Qwen-Audio
Gemini - 1/1.5
DeepSeek - Coder - 1/2
DeepSeek - Chat- 1/2
Baichuan
ERNIE
Mistral
Codestral
WebGPT
Figure 1: Recently, numerous large language models
have been released, each with its own unique strengths.
This diversity has fueled research into collaboration
between these models.
emerged as one of the most rapidly developing
and promising directions in artificial intelligence.
These models have significantly transformed the
paradigm of natural language processing (NLP)
(Min et al., 2023a; Chang et al., 2024; Zhao et al.,
2023) and influenced other areas (Wu et al., 2023a;
Zhang et al., 2024a). This impressive revolution
has inspired numerous universities, institutes, and
companies to pre-train and release their own LLMs.
Currently, over 74,000 pre-trained models are avail-
able on the HuggingFace model hub1. As shown in
Figure 1, these models, trained with diverse data,
architectures, and methodologies, possess unique
capabilities: some are proficient in multilingual
tasks (Le Scao et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2022), others
specialize in domains like medicine (Yang et al.,
2024b) or finance (Wu et al., 2023b), some are
adept at processing long-context windows (Chen
et al., 2023e,f), while others are fine-tuned for
better alignment with human interaction (Ouyang
et al., 2022). However, no single model consis-
tently outperforms all others across tasks (Jiang
1https://huggingface.co/models
1
arXiv:2407.06089v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jul 2024

et al., 2023a). This variability motivates research
into the collaboration between various LLMs to
unlock their combined potential, akin to creating a
Hexagon Warrior.
Despite progress in LLM collaboration research,
the relationships and context among the proposed
methods remain unclear. This survey aims to fill
that gap by categorizing collaboration techniques
into three main approaches: Merging, Ensemble,
and Cooperation. Specifically, Merging and En-
semble methods for LLMs are derived from tradi-
tional fusion techniques commonly explored in ma-
chine learning (Li et al., 2023a). These methods are
tailored to be more suitable for LLMs, effectively
leveraging the collaborative advantages of diverse
LLMs. Merging involves integrating the parame-
ters of multiple LLMs into a single, unified model,
requiring that the parameters are compatible within
a linear space. In contrast, Ensemble focuses on
combining the outputs generated by various LLMs
to produce coherent results, with less emphasis on
the parameters of the individual models. Coopera-
tion extends beyond merging and ensemble. This
survey concentrates on cooperative methods that
harness the diverse strengths of LLMs to achieve
specific objectives. In general, these techniques
expand the methodologies for model collaboration,
holding significant research importance for LLMs.
The structure of this work is organized as follows.
We begin by providing the background of LLMs
and defining collaboration techniques for LLMs
in Section 2. Next, we introduce three key cate-
gories: Merging in Section 3, Ensemble in Section
4, and Cooperation in Section 5. Each category
of methods is thoroughly classified and described
in detail, offering a clear understanding of their
respective frameworks and applications. Finally,
we offer a comprehensive discussion in Section 6,
highlighting challenges and future directions for
research.
In summary, this study aims to comprehensively
explore the strategies and methodologies for col-
laborative efforts among LLMs. We aspire for this
survey to enrich understanding of LLM collabora-
tion strategies and to inspire future research.
2
Background
2.1
Large Language Models
Language modeling has always been a cornerstone
of natural language processing (NLP). Recently,
plenty of studies scale up of Transformer-based lan-
guage models (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al.,
2018) to substantial more than billions of param-
eters, exemplified by models like GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023; Anil
et al., 2023), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a,b).
These models are typically considered as Large
Language Models (LLMs) due to their massive
amount of parameters (Zhao et al., 2023). This
subsection discusses the architecture and scaling of
LLMs, their training objectives, and the emergent
abilities they exhibit.
Architecture and Scaling
Similar to pre-trained
language models (PLMs) (Radford et al., 2018; De-
vlin et al., 2019), LLMs primarily adopt the Trans-
former architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) as their
backbone, consisting of stacked multi-head atten-
tion and feed-forward layers. Unlike PLMs, most
currently released LLMs are built upon decoder-
only architectures for training efficiency and few-
shot capabilities. This approach also shows po-
tential when the number of parameters increases
(Zhang et al., 2022). Recent studies have investi-
gated the quantitative relationship between model
capacity, the amount of training data, and model
size, known as the scaling law (Kaplan et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022).
Training Objectives
In the previous studies
about PLMs, various language modeling tasks are
proposed. For example, masked language model-
ing for BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), De-noising lan-
guage modeling for BART (Lewis et al., 2020) and
T5 (Raffel et al., 2020). However, current LLMs
typically utilize the standard causal language mod-
eling as their training objective, which aims to pre-
dict the next token based on the preceding tokens
in a sequence. This training objective is well-suited
for decoder-only architectures.
Beyond the pre-training objective, recent studies
have aimed to model human preferences to better
align LLMs with human expectations. For exam-
ple, the well-known InstructGPT (Ouyang et al.,
2022) introduces reinforcement learning from hu-
man feedback (RLHF), which uses preference re-
wards as an additional training objective. Although
RLHF is effective at making LLMs more helpful to
users, it inevitably incurs an alignment tax, which
refers to performance degradation after RLHF. Re-
cent research has explored various techniques to
mitigate alignment tax issues (Lin et al., 2023; Lu
et al., 2024b; Fu et al., 2024b).
2

(a) LLM Merging
(b) LLM Ensemble
(c) LLM Cooperation
Isaac Newton
Newton
Isaac Newton
Isaac Newton
Final Answer
Guys, I need help!
How can we assist you?
Who discovered the law of gravity?
Contrast?
Compression?
Checking?
Figure 2: The illustration of different collaboration strategies, with each animal in the figures representing a different
LLM.
Emergent Abilities
The fundamental capability
of language models is text generation, where tokens
are auto-regressively generated based on preceding
tokens using greedy search or nucleus sampling
(Holtzman et al., 2020a):
yi ∼p(yi|y<i)
(1)
Interestingly, LLMs can not only generate real-
istic text but also perform specific tasks when pro-
vided with task-specific prompts, without requiring
fine-tuning on particular downstream tasks (Brown
et al., 2020). This phenomenon is one of the most
important differences between LLMs and previ-
ous PLMs. Wei et al. (2022b) define the emergent
ability as “an ability that is not present in smaller
models but is present in larger models.” Among
these emergent abilities, in-context learning (ICL)
(Brown et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2022) and instruc-
tion following are commonly used and significantly
enhance the ability of LLMs to process various
tasks.
ICL helps LLMs understand tasks by using sev-
eral task examples as demonstrations. When pro-
vide these demonstrations as prompts, LLMs can
automatically generate reasonable output for the
given test example, which can be formalized as:
p(y|x) = p(y|x, demonstration({(xi, yi)}k
i=1))
(2)
Instruction following ability are typically emerge
in LLMs that have been fine-tuned on examples
formatted with instructions on multiple tasks. The
generation process can be formalized as:
p(y|x) = p(y|x, I)
(3)
where I refers to the given instruction for cur-
rent example x. The instruction tuning technique
(Sanh et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al.,
2022a) can enhance the generalization capabilities
of LLMs, enabling them to perform well with in-
structions on a variety of tasks, including unseen
ones (Thoppilan et al., 2022).
2.2
Collaboration for LLMs
For previous task-dependent NLP models, collabo-
ration strategies typically aimed to improve perfor-
mance on specific tasks (Jia et al., 2023). Recently,
LLMs have revolutionized NLP by demonstrating
remarkable versatility across a wide range of tasks.
This shift has also shifted the focus of collabora-
tion strategies for LLMs toward enhancing versa-
tility and achieving more general objectives. Con-
sequently, some recently proposed collaboration
strategies have become more flexible and tailored
specifically for LLMs.
The Necessity of LLM Collaboration
Although
almost all LLMs demonstrate strong versatility
across various tasks through in-context learning
and instruction following, different LLMs still have
distinct strengths and weaknesses (Jiang et al.,
2023a).
Differences in training corpora and model ar-
chitectures among various LLM families—such
as LLaMA, GLM (Zeng et al., 2023), and QWen
(Bai et al., 2023)—result in significant variations
in their capabilities. Even within the same fam-
ily, fine-tuning on specific corpora (e.g., mathemat-
ics (Azerbayev et al., 2023), code (Roziere et al.,
2023), or medical domains (Wu et al., 2024)) can
lead to noticeable performance differences. Effec-
tive collaboration among these LLMs can unlock
3

LLM Collaboration
Cooperation (§5)
Federated Co-
operation (§5.4)
Federated
Prompt Engi-
neering (§5.4.2)
e.g Zhang et al. (2024b), Li
et al. (2024a), Guo et al. (2022)
Federated Train-
ing (§5.4.1)
e.g. Fan et al. (2024), Ye et al.
(2024), Wang et al. (2024d)
Compensatory
Cooperation (§5.3)
Retriever (§5.3.2)
e.g. Ma et al. (2023b), Mao et al.
(2024), Li et al. (2024d), Su et al. (2024)
Detector (§5.3.1)
e.g. Pan et al. (2023), Huo et al. (2023),
Chen et al. (2023b), Wang et al. (2024c)
Knowledge
Transfer (§5.2)
Supplying New
Knowledge (§5.2.3)
e.g. Ormazabal et al. (2023), (Liu et al., 2024a),
Zhao et al. (2024b), Zhou et al. (2024b)
Strengthening
Correct Knowl-
edge (§5.2.2)
e.g. Tu et al. (2023), Lu et al.
(2024a), Deng and Raffel (2023)
Mitigating
Incorrect Knowl-
edge (§5.2.1)
e.g. Li et al. (2023b), Liu et al. (2021),
O’Brien and Lewis (2023), Shi et al. (2024)
Efficient Com-
putation (§5.1)
Speculative
Decoding (§5.1.2)
e.g. Stern et al. (2018), Leviathan et al.
(2023), Ou et al. (2024), Huang et al. (2024a)
Input Compres-
sion (§5.1.1)
e.g. LLMLINGUA (Jiang et al., 2023b), Li
et al. (2024b), Liu et al. (2023), (Gao, 2024b)
Ensemble (§4)
LLM Ensemble
Application (§4.2)
e.g. Gundabathula and Kolar (2024), Barabucci et al.
(2024), Coste et al. (2024), Ahmed et al. (2024)
LLM Ensemble
Methodology (§4.1)
After Infer-
ence (§4.1.3)
e.g. Chen et al. (2023d), Madaan et al.
(2023), Yue et al. (2024), Jiang et al. (2023a)
During Infer-
ence (§4.1.2)
e.g. Hoang et al. (2023), Li et al. (2024c),
Xu et al. (2024b), Huang et al. (2024c)
Before Infer-
ence (§4.1.1)
e.g. Shnitzer et al. (2023), Lu et al. (2023),
Srivatsa et al. (2024), Hu et al. (2024)
Merging (§3)
Merging for
Enhancing Multi-
Task Capability
(M-MTC) (§3.2)
Methods based
on Incremental
Training (§3.2.3)
e.g. Tang et al. (2023), Yang et al. (2024a)
Methods based
on Task Prop-
erty (§3.2.2)
e.g. Ilharco et al. (2023), Yadav et al. (2023), Yang
et al. (2023), Zhou et al. (2024a), Yu et al. (2023)
Methods based
on Weighted
Average (§3.2.1)
e.g. Jin et al. (2022), Daheim
et al. (2023), Nathan et al. (2024)
Merging for
Relatively Optimal
Solution (M-
ROS) (§3.1)
Adaptation to
LLMs (§3.1.2)
e.g. Wan et al. (2024b), Liu et al. (2024b), Kim
et al. (2024), Fu et al. (2024a), Lin et al. (2023)
Basic M-ROS
Methodolo-
gies (§3.1.1)
e.g. Soup (Wortsman et al., 2022), Rame et al.
(2022), Wan et al. (2024b), Liu et al. (2024b)
Figure 3: The primary categorization of LLM collaboration in this survey.
4

their full potential, significantly enhancing their
overall performance and versatility.
Furthermore, LLMs inevitably suffer from com-
putational inefficiencies (Zhou et al., 2024c), hallu-
cinations (Rawte et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2023), and privacy leaks Fan et al. (2024).
Recent studies explore the collaboration strategies
between LLMs, which provides potential solutions
to mitigate these issues and compensate for their
shortcomings.
The Category of LLM Collaboration Methods
Collaboration between LLMs refers to the pro-
cess where multiple LLMs work together, lever-
aging their individual strengths and capabilities
to achieve a shared objective. In this survey, we
categorize LLM collaboration methods into three
aspects: merging, ensemble and cooperation. As
shown in Figure 2,
• Merging involves integrating multiple LLMs
into a unified, stronger one, primarily through
arithmetic operations in the model parameter
space.
• Ensemble combines the outputs of different
models to obtain coherent results. Recent stud-
ies have proposed various ensemble methods
tailored for LLMs.
• Cooperation is a relatively broad concept.
This survey focuses on cooperation methods
that leverage the diverse capabilities of differ-
ent LLMs to accomplish specific objectives,
such as efficient computation or knowledge
transfer.
It should be noted that as we move from merging
to ensemble to cooperation, the requirements for
LLMs gradually relax, making the proposed meth-
ods increasingly flexible. Specifically, merging
methods are effective only when the LLMs share
a compatible parameter space, allowing seamless
integration. Ensemble methods require LLMs to
have diverse yet comparable abilities; without this
balance, the ensemble may be less effective. In
contrast, cooperation methods are more flexible,
focusing on leveraging LLMs with various capabili-
ties that are specially designed to achieve particular
objectives.
For each category, we further classify specific
methods based on their focus or stages of imple-
mentation. The comprehensive categorization is
shown in Figure 3.
3
Merging
Single models have inherent limitations, such as po-
tentially missing important information (Sagi and
Rokach, 2018), and being prone to getting stuck
in local optima or lacking multi-task capabilities.
To address these limitations, researchers have ex-
plored model merging methods, which combine
multiple models in the parameter space to create a
unified, stronger model. Model merging has made
significant progress in recent years, with various
techniques cataloged in existing surveys (Li et al.,
2023a). In the era of LLMs, model merging has
become an important solution for model collabo-
ration, usually employing basic merging methods
and demonstrate the effectiveness. This section
focuses on the merging techniques that are proven
to be effective for LLMs2.
Current studies on model merging typically fo-
cus on two key issues: merging to approach a rel-
atively optimal solution (M-ROS) and merging to
enhance multi-task capability (M-MTC). Research
on M-ROS is based on the finding that gradient-
optimized solutions often converge near the bound-
ary of a wide flat region rather than at the central
point (Izmailov et al., 2018). Model merging of-
fers a way to approach this relatively optimal point,
thereby yielding a stronger model. M-MTC, on
the other hand, aims to utilize model merging tech-
niques to enrich a single model with capabilities
across multiple tasks (Ilharco et al., 2023; Yadav
et al., 2023). In the following subsection, we will
introduce the techniques for each objective and
their application to LLMs.
It is important to note that for both M-ROS and
M-MTC, current model merging methods are appli-
cable only to models with the same architecture and
parameters within the same space. Therefore, most
candidate models for merging should be trained
with identical initialization. For instance, the can-
didate models M = {M1, M2, · · · , Mk} should
be fine-tuned from the same pre-trained model M0.
This requirement ensures compatibility and coher-
ence among the model parameters, promoting suc-
cessful merging. Unfortunately, for models with in-
compatible parameters, such as LLaMA and QWen,
current merging techniques are ineffective.
2Some advanced methods, such as merging after neuron
alignments - like OT Fusion (Singh and Jaggi, 2020), Re-
Basin techniques (Peña et al., 2023; Ainsworth et al., 2023),
and REPAIR (Jordan et al., 2023) - have not been widely
explored for LLMs. We leave the implementation of these
techniques on LLMs for future work.
5

3.1
Merging for Relatively Optimal Solution
(M-ROS)
Machine learning models, particularly deep learn-
ing models, often fail to achieve precisely optimal
solutions during training (Li et al., 2023a). Re-
searchers have demonstrated that the local optima
of modern deep neural networks are connected by
simple curves, and the paths along these curves can
maintain nearly constant training and test accuracy.
This indicates that different local optima in the
weight space are not isolated but can be connected
through low-loss paths (Garipov et al., 2018). The
model obtained by the weighted averaging method
can be considered a point on the low-loss path.
Parameter averaging integrates the advantages of
different models by averaging various local optima,
reducing the bias and variance of individual models
(Rame et al., 2022).
To improve model performance, M-ROS meth-
ods have been proposed. These methods aim to
combine the parameters of multiple models, merg-
ing relatively optimized points into a better one. We
categorize these methods into two groups: Simple
Average and Weighted Average. Although initially
developed for small deep models, these techniques
are also effective for LLMs. We will first introduce
the basic M-ROS methodologies and then discuss
their application to LLMs.
3.1.1
Basic M-ROS Methodologies
Simple Average
Simple parameter averaging is
a kinds of methods used to combine the param-
eters of multiple fine-tuned models with equal
coefficients (Guo et al., 2023), thus creating a
stronger one (Singh and Jaggi, 2020). Empirical
evidence shows that these fused models often out-
perform individual models in terms of accuracy,
robustness and stability. For k candidate models,
M = {M1, M2, · · · , Mk}, simple parameter av-
eraging can be formalized as:
θ∗= 1
k
k
X
i=1
θMi
(4)
where θMi refers to the parameters of i-th model
and θ∗is the merged parameters.
To maximize the benefits of multiple models,
Model Soup (Wortsman et al., 2022) introduces
Uniform Soup and Greedy Soup. Uniform Soup
simply averages the model parameters. Greedy
Soup adds models to the pool one at a time, ensur-
ing each new model either improves or maintains
performance on a validation set. Similarly, DiWA
(Rame et al., 2022) ranks candidate models by their
performance on the validation set and adds new
models only if they enhance performance. Typi-
cally, Greedy Soup and DiWA average the parame-
ters of selected models for inference.
Weighted Average
Weighted averaging allows
for the assignment of different coefficients to indi-
vidual models based on their significance or qual-
ity, ensuring a better merging. For trained net-
works with significant weight differences, the sim-
ple averaging method often performs poorly (Singh
and Jaggi, 2020). Therefore, selecting appropriate
merging coefficients for different models becomes
a crucial factor. Weighted averaging can be formal-
ized as:
θ∗=
k
X
i=1
αi · θMi
(5)
where αi refers to the normalized coefficient for
the candidate model Mi.
Currently, several methods are available to find
the optimal merging coefficients. For instance,
Learned Soup (Wortsman et al., 2022) optimizes
the mixing coefficients on a validation set to min-
imize the loss function, thereby combining the
strengths of multiple models to enhance overall
performance. Matena and Raffel (2022) propose
to utilize Fisher Information Matrix to measure
the importance of parameters of models fine-tuned
with different random seeds, and employ the impor-
tance scores as coefficients to merge them. Further-
more, Jang et al. (2024) propose a method based
on geometric relationships, interpolating fine-tuned
models based on the angular divergence between
parameters.
3.1.2
Adaptation to LLMs
The above model merging techniques have been
successfully adapted to LLMs for the objective of
acquiring stronger LLMs and enhancing RLHF.
Acquiring Stronger LLMs
To obtain stronger
LLMs, some studies propose novel methods tai-
lored for LLMs. Wan et al. (2024b) suggest calcu-
lating the merging coefficients based on the vari-
ation ratio of parameter matrices before and af-
ter fine-tuning. Similarly, Liu et al. (2024b) pro-
pose leveraging LLM checkpoints saved during
pre-training, in conjunction with Bayesian opti-
mization, to navigate the extensive search space
6

Parameter
Task 𝒕𝟏Vector - 𝝉𝒕𝟏
Task 𝒕𝟐Vector - 𝝉𝒕𝟐
Conflicts
Model 1
Model 2
Figure 4: Illustration of the parameter conflicts. The di-
rection denoting sign and length denoting magnitude of
task vectors. The conflicts occur when the task vectors
have opposite signs.
and identify optimal merging coefficients. To ad-
dress concerns about gradient mismatch, Lin et al.
(2023) introduce an adaptive method that assigns
different combination ratios to various layers of
the model, optimizing these combinations to bal-
ance human preference alignment and pre-training
proficiency.
Other studies employ existing model merging
techniques to create stronger LLMs for specific ob-
jectives. For example, Fu et al. (2024a) propose a
disperse-then-merge framework, which first train
multiple sub-models using different instruction-
tuning data portions and then fuse them into a sin-
gle LLM with weighted merging.
Enhancing RLHF
Model merging techniques
also help improve the alignment of LLMs with hu-
man preferences. Lin et al. (2023) present an adap-
tive method where different combination ratios are
assigned to various layers of the model, optimizing
these combinations to balance human preference
alignment and pretraining proficiency. Ram’e et al.
(2024) propose fine-tuning multiple reward mod-
els and then averaging their parameters to create a
superior reward model that aligns better with hu-
man preferences. Similarly, Fu et al. (2024b) use
a weighted averaging approach to improve align-
ment in LLMs during the supervised fine-tuning
(SFT), effectively reducing the impact of data bias.
Lu et al. (2024b) propose to use model merging
technique to reduce alignment taxes during RLHF
training for LLMs.
3.2
Merging for Enhancing Multi-Task
Capability (M-MTC)
Recently, some studies have attempted to merge
models with different capability to construct a uni-
fied model with multi-task capability (Li et al.,
2022). Typically, these models are fine-tuned from
the same pre-trained model but with different task-
specific data, leading to divergence in their param-
eter spaces. Such divergence often reflects task-
related information. Consequently, M-MTC meth-
ods aim to relieve the divergence and achieve a
balanced merging of models with different capabil-
ities, thereby producing a single model capable of
handling multiple tasks.
Early studies addressed the issue of divergence
by using different merging coefficients for various
models (§3.2.1, Weight Average), while current re-
search prefers to extract task properties from the di-
vergence to achieve more flexible merging (§3.2.2,
Task Property). Furthermore, recent works have
started to employ incremental learning techniques
to enhance model merging performance (§3.2.3, In-
cremental Training). We separately introduce these
methods in the following subsections.
3.2.1
Methods based on Weighted Average
Some studies adopt weighted-average strategies (as
introduced in §3.1.1) to adjust the importance of
different models. Jin et al. (2022) propose Reg-
Mean to selectively integrate the linear layers of
Transformer models while using simple averag-
ing for other layers, thereby minimizing the di-
vergence between the merged model and multiple
models fine-tuned on various datasets. Daheim
et al. (2023) advocate refining model merging using
estimates derived from the Hessian matrix, facilitat-
ing more precise adjustments to model parameters.
Nathan et al. (2024) combine Fisher weighted av-
eraging with model pruning, achieving efficient
model merging.
3.2.2
Methods based on Task Property
Merging methods based on weighted average em-
phasize the importance of parameters but overlook
their task-specific properties, leading to significant
performance degradation in certain tasks. Ilharco
et al. (2023) find that “Simple Averaging suffers
from a 10% performance drop”. To address this
issue, recent studies introduce a new paradigm
known as the task vector. Ilharco et al. (2023)
define the task vector τt as “a vector specifies a
direction in the parameter space of a pre-trained
model, such that movement in that direction im-
proves performance on the task”, which can be
formalized as:
τt = θft
t −θpre
(6)
where θft
t refers to the parameters fine-tuned with
the specific data for task t, and θpre refers to the
original parameters of the pre-trained model.
7

Task vector can more effectively resolve param-
eter conflicts during the model merging. As illus-
trated in Figure 4, using the pre-trained model as
a reference, the variation in the direction of task
vectors of the fine-tuned models indicates the pres-
ence of conflicts in the parameter space. To address
parameter conflicts problem, recent studies aim to
exploring methods to mitigate conflicts and strike
a balance between the different models. Parame-
ter Conflict methods resolve parameter conflicts at
same position of parameters, while Fewer Parame-
ter methods identify and prune redundant parame-
ters to reduce conflict. In addition, we introduce a
tool that includes some methods in Toolkit.
Resolving Parameter Conflicts
TASK ARITH-
METIC (Ilharco et al., 2023) initially derives task
vectors through arithmetic operations between fine-
tuned and pre-trained parameters, as shown in equa-
tion (6). These task vectors are subsequently used
to merge models for enhancing performance on
target tasks. To further address the issue of param-
eter conflicts in model merging, TIES-MERGING
(Yadav et al., 2023) identifies two primary causes
of interference: redundant parameter values and
sign inconsistencies across models. Building on
these advancements, ADAMERGING(Yang et al.,
2023) reduces conflicts even further by consid-
ering the importance of different model parame-
ters. METAGPT (Zhou et al., 2024a) proposes effi-
cient methods based on ADAMERGING and TASK
ARITHMETIC. Akiba et al. (2024) propose a merg-
ing method for LLMs, which not only employ TIE-
MERGING for merging in parameter space, but also
adopt evolutionary algorithms to optimize the data
inference path inside the merge model. The above
methods have been successfully adapted to LLMs.
Kim et al. (2024) apply the above methods to fuse
the LLMs obtain a stronger LLM evaluator. Ham-
moud et al. (2024) investigate the effects of above
methods on LLM safety alignment.
Unlike the aforementioned task vector based
methods to resolve conflicting parameters, Stoica
et al. (2024) propose ZIPIT that retains similar pa-
rameters from another perspective. ZIPIT first iden-
tifies highly correlated parameters between differ-
ent models. It then merges these parameters while
retaining significantly different layers, thus improv-
ing the merging flexibility.
Pruning Redundant Parameters
Given that
conflicts may exist in the parameters of different
models, another solution is to employ pruning tech-
niques to reduce these conflicts before merging.
Such methods further enhances the relevance of pa-
rameters to the task, and we introduce these meth-
ods separately. DARE (Yu et al., 2023), a tech-
nique that efficiently reduces redundancy in fine-
tuned language models by dropping and rescaling
parameters. DELLA-MERGING (Deep et al., 2024)
further selects important parameters for fusion on
the basis of DARE. As domain-specific data and
training techniques grow, the distinctions between
fine-tuned models and their base models become
more significant. However, DARE experiences sig-
nificant performance drops, resulting in insufficient
capability to process multiple domains effectively.
DPPA (Zhu et al., 2024) presents a dual-stage prun-
ing approach as Dynamic Pruning Partition Ampli-
fication (DPPA) for effectively merging divergent
fine-tuned large language models across different
domains.
Toolkit
Recently, Goddard et al. (2024) have
developed Arcee’s MergeKit, an open-source
toolkit that integrates various model merging meth-
ods, including Model Soups, DARE, and TIES-
MERGING. This toolkit significantly advances the
application of model merging strategies in LLMs3.
3.2.3
Methods based on Incremental Training
The aforementioned methods still suffer from per-
formance degradation.
Therefore, several ap-
proaches involving incremental training have been
proposed to restore their original performance.
Concrete TA/AM (Tang et al., 2023) aims to find
a shared low-dimensional subspace within the
model parameter space to minimize task interfer-
ence without significantly impacting performance.
Surgery (Yang et al., 2024a) introduces a represen-
tation surgery technique to mitigate representation
bias in multi-task model fusion.
4
Ensemble
Ensemble learning is another effective collabora-
tion strategy that differs from model merging meth-
ods by focusing on the combination of model out-
puts. Traditional techniques like Adaboost (Freund
and Schapire, 1997), Bagging (Breiman, 1996),
and Stacking (Wolpert, 1992) have significantly
advanced machine learning research. In the era
of LLMs, ensemble learning continues to be cru-
cial, enhancing the overall performance of various
LLMs.
3https://github.com/arcee-ai/mergekit
8

However, LLMs typically solve various tasks
through text generation, resulting in more flexi-
ble and naturally expressive outputs. Therefore,
traditional ensemble methods designed for classi-
fication tasks cannot be directly applied to LLMs.
To address this issue, many studies explore spe-
cific ensemble methodologies tailored for various
LLMs4. Additionally, the benefits of ensemble
learning have inspired research into various appli-
cations of these techniques. In the following sec-
tions, we will separately introduce LLM ensemble
methodologies and applications in detail.
4.1
LLM Ensemble Methodology
For different inputs, LLM that performs best is not
always the same, prompting extensive research into
ensemble methods for LLMs. Unlike classification-
based machine learning models, LLMs typically
generate a sequence of tokens as output. This out-
put is often discrete, making direct ensemble chal-
lenging. Additionally, structural differences be-
tween various LLMs result in vocabularies and
output distributions that are difficult to unify, fur-
ther complicating ensemble strategies (Xu et al.,
2024b).
Since ensemble generally occurs during the infer-
ence period, we categorize and introduce existing
ensemble methods employed BEFORE, DURING,
and AFTER the inference period. As illustrated
in Figure 5, ensemble methods BEFORE inference
select the most suitable LLM for different input
examples, ensemble methods DURING inference
combine outputs at each decoding step, and ensem-
ble methods AFTER inference aim to select the best
response from several outputs generated by various
LLMs.
4.1.1
Ensemble BEFORE Inference
Such methods aim to select the best LLM for spe-
cific examples before inference. Similar but dif-
ferent from various Mixture-of-Expert (MOE) ap-
proaches (Jacobs et al., 1991; Collobert et al., 2003;
Eigen et al., 2013; Fedus et al., 2022; Jiang et al.,
2024), which learn sparse networks from scratch,
ensemble BEFORE Inference focuses on training
external routers (Rosenbaum et al., 2017) for sev-
eral pre-trained LLMs to achieve optimal LLM
selection.
4It is worth noting that many studies explore self-ensemble
approaches, such as self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023b)
and rationale augmentation (Wang et al., 2022). Our survey
focuses on ensembles across different LLMs and does not
cover these methods.
Shnitzer et al. (2023) take the lead to explore
the feasibility and limitations of learning routers by
using various benchmark datasets. Lu et al. (2023)
introduce ZOOTER, a system that first employs a
reward model to calculate scores for query-output
pairs using the training set. These scores are then
utilized to train a router using the knowledge dis-
tillation strategy, allowing it to select the optimal
LLM based solely on input queries. Ding et al.
(2024) employ a router that assigns queries to ei-
ther a small model or LLMs based on the predicted
query difficulty and the required quality level, sig-
nificantly reducing inference costs. Srivatsa et al.
(2024) investigate the feasibility of classifier-based
and clustering-based routing methods for LLMs.
Inspired by self-play in reinforcement learning,
Mohammadshahi et al. (2024) train the router by re-
cycling the self-produced triplets, (query, response,
score). Unlike previous studies, Lu et al. (2024c)
integrate multiple Chat LLMs by randomly select-
ing an LLM at each turn in the dialogue, rather than
learning a router. To effectively evaluate the router
capability and limitations, Hu et al. (2024) pro-
pose a new benchmark, ROUTERBENCH, mainly
focusing on performance and economic cost.
4.1.2
Ensemble DURING Inference
During the inference period, LLMs generate to-
kens auto-regressively. This process often results in
early errors compounding over time, causing subse-
quent tokens to deviate from the intended meaning
(Ranzato et al., 2016) and leading to hallucinations
(Zhang et al., 2023a).
To address this problem, some studies perform
ensemble LLMs at each decoding step. Li et al.
(2024c) combine untrusted LLMs with a benign
smaller LLM by weighted-averaging the output
distributions, mitigating issues such as copyright
infringement, data poisoning, and privacy viola-
tions. Hoang et al. (2023) interpolate the output
distributions from the machine translation model
and the LLM, boosting translation performance.
Wang et al. (2024b) formulate the Frugal Fusion of
Experts problem and proposes an efficient fusion
method by addressing it as a graph shortest path
problem. These methods require the ensemble to
occur among LLMs which must at least have the
same vocabulary. This restriction ensures that the
output distributions are aligned and can be interpo-
lated effectively.
However, most open-source LLMs are hetero-
geneous and have different vocabularies, hinder-
9

Who discovered the law of gravity?
Router 
Network
Who discovered the law of gravity?
New
Issac
Issac
Who discovered the law of gravity?
Isaac Newton
Decoding Step - t
Issac
Isaac Newton
Newton
Isaac Newton
Isaac Newton
Selection
(a) Ensemble before Inference
(b) Ensemble during Inference
(c) Ensemble after Inference
Figure 5: The illustrations of LLM ensemble methods BEFORE (a), DURING (b), AFTER (c) inference.
ing direct ensembling. To address this issue, Fu
et al. (2023) employ dynamic programming to re-
cursively minimize the total cost measured by the
exact match scores of editing one sequence of to-
kens to match another. To further enhance the suc-
cess rate of token alignments, Wan et al. (2024a)
replace the exact match constraint with a minimum
edit distance strategy. Mavromatis et al. (2024)
follow the above token alignments, proposing the
use of perplexity to compute the coefficients for the
outputs of diverse LLMs during ensemble. Xu et al.
(2024b), Huang et al. (2024c), and (Yu et al., 2024)
consider overlapping tokens as anchors to project
the output distribution produced by heterogeneous
LLMs into the same space. Specifically, Xu et al.
(2024b) propose to directly learn the projection ma-
trices between different vocabularies using the an-
chors as bridges, while Huang et al. (2024c) and Yu
et al. (2024) calculate the relative representations
from anchors to different vocabularies, thereby in-
directly achieving the vocabulary projection.
4.1.3
Ensemble AFTER Inference
The final LLM ensemble methods combine the gen-
erated outputs AFTER the inference period.
One approach to achieving the LLM ensemble
involves building LLM cascades to reduce the in-
ference cost associated with using large LLMs ex-
clusively. Chen et al. (2023d) employ a sequence
of LLMs ranked by the number of parameters to
generate outputs, halting the process and returning
results once a preceding smaller LLM produces
outputs of sufficient quality. Yue et al. (2024) pro-
pose verifying the correctness of answers generated
by a smaller LLM first and utilizing LLMs to solve
the problem if the initial answer is incorrect.
Another line of research focuses on selecting the
best candidate from several produced by various
LLMs. Lee et al. (2023) select the best instruc-
tion from several candidates produced by LLMs
for instruction-tuning data construction. Jiang et al.
(2023a) explore various unsupervised metrics for
selection, including BERTScore (Zhang* et al.,
2020), BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020), BARTScore
(Yuan et al., 2021), and ChatGPT scores. However,
they find that the effectiveness of the selection is
constrained by the quality of candidate pools. To
address this problem, Jiang et al. (2023a) adopt an
additional fusion model to generate the final output
using the top-ranked candidates as inputs.
4.1.4
Discussion about LLM Ensemble
Methods
The methods described above focus on ensemble
techniques at different stages of inference, each
with its own strengths and weaknesses. We dis-
cuss them in terms of inference speed, ensemble
granularity, and limitations.
Inference Speed
Almost all ensemble methods
decrease inference speed. Ensemble methods BE-
FORE inference slightly slow down the process, as
they involve selecting the optimal LLM via addi-
tional routers. Ensemble methods DURING infer-
ence require each LLM to perform forward compu-
tation for test examples. If we have k LLMs, the
inference speed will slow down by a factor of k,
although this can be mitigated by using k times the
number of GPUs. Ensemble methods AFTER in-
ference not only require k times the computational
cost but also spend additional time on output selec-
tion or fusion (Jiang et al., 2023a), resulting in the
lowest inference speed.
Ensemble Granularity
The aforementioned en-
semble methods operate at different levels of gran-
ularity. Ensemble methods BEFORE and AFTER in-
10

Inference Stage
Inference Speed
Ensemble Granularity
Limitations & Challenge
BEFORE
↘
example-level
Accuracy of Routers
DURING
↘↘
token-level
Heterogeneous Architectures
AFTER
↘↘↘
example-level
Accuracy of Candidate Pools
Table 1: The characteristic of LLM ensemble methods employed at different inference stages.
ference typically work at the example level, provid-
ing a coarse-grained ensemble. Ensemble methods
DURING inference perform ensemble at the token
level, offering a fine-grained approach. Since pre-
ceding tokens often influence succeeding tokens,
this fine-grained ensemble can reduce exposure
bias (Ranzato et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2020) and de-
crease hallucination in LLMs, thus holding better
potential for performance enhancement.
Limitations
Each category of ensemble meth-
ods have specific limitations, as shown in Table
1. Although ensemble methods BEFORE inference
offer better speed, they require additional training
of the router. The data used for router training
can limit the generalization and performance of
these ensemble methods (Shnitzer et al., 2023). En-
semble methods DURING inference are typically
constrained by the heterogeneous architecture of
LLMs. For example, differences in vocabularies
can lead to non-corresponding output distributions,
hindering direct ensemble (Huang et al., 2024c; Yu
et al., 2024). Ensemble methods AFTER inference
often require multiple LLMs to generate several
candidates, construct a candidate pool, and then
select or reorganize the final output. Thus, the ac-
curacy of the candidate pool (Jiang et al., 2023a)
and the selection strategy are the main limitations.
4.2
LLM Ensemble Application
In addition to methodological research, many stud-
ies apply LLM ensembles to specific applications.
This is due to the capability of ensemble learning
ability on specific tasks, domains and strong cali-
bration. We categorize these related studies based
on their objectives.
LLM Ensemble for Specific Tasks or Domains
Ensemble learning for LLMs are typically em-
ployed for specific tasks. Si et al. (2023) improve
LLM reasoning performance by training a classi-
fier to select the best answer generated by various
reasoning experts. Gundabathula and Kolar (2024)
employ LLM ensemble for SQL generation. Some
studies employ LLM ensemble for medical tasks.
Gundabathula and Kolar (2024) adopt LLM en-
semble to enhance the clinical text error detection
and correction. Oniani et al. (2023) and Barabucci
et al. (2024) utilize majority voting and average
weighting, respectively, to select the most frequent
candidate disease.
LLM Ensemble for Overestimation Mitigation
in RLHF
Ensemble learning can alleviate the
poor calibration and unreliable prediction problems
of LLMs. Therefore, Eisenstein et al. (2023), Coste
et al. (2024) and Ramé et al. (2024) perform en-
semble with multiple reward LLMs to mitigate the
overoptimization problem in RLHF. Considering
that fine-tuning reward models based on LLMs can
be computationally expensive, Zhang et al. (2024c)
and Zhai et al. (2023) respectively employ light-
weight LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) to adapt the LLM to
multiple reward models. Ahmed et al. (2024) pro-
pose using a shared LLM but separate linear heads
for reward ensemble. These methods successfully
reduce the overestimation in RLHF and improve
the alignment performance..
5
Cooperation
In the era of LLMs, collaborative strategies ex-
tend beyond mere merging or ensemble. Increas-
ingly, studies are focusing on broader approaches to
solving various problems or specific tasks through
cooperation between LLMs. In the following sec-
tions, we introduce the cooperation strategies based
on their objectives: efficient computation (§5.1),
knowledge transferring (§5.2), compensatory co-
operation (§5.3), federated cooperation (§5.4).
5.1
Efficient Computation
As LLMs grow in scale, the computational re-
sources required for their inference increase signifi-
cantly. Consequently, accelerating model inference
has become an urgent necessity. Smaller LLMs
play a crucial role in accelerating larger LLMs due
to their lightweight nature (Miao et al., 2023). Re-
search on model acceleration through cooperation
can be divided into two main categories: Input
Compression (§5.1.1) and Speculative Decoding
11

(§5.1.2). Input Compression achieves efficient com-
putation by using smaller LLMs to compress in-
puts, thereby reducing the context length. Specula-
tive Decoding involves leveraging smaller LLMs
to draft multiple tokens speculatively, with larger
LLMs verifying these draft tokens in parallel.
5.1.1
Input Compression
Input Compression
LLM
Figure 6: LLMs cooperate with compression module
for input compression.
Input compression aims to use small models to
compress input prompts or long text content. When
processing long input sequences, the self-attention
mechanism of LLMs results in significant increases
in computational cost and memory usage due to
its quadratic time complexity (Xu et al., 2024a).
Input compression reduces computational costs,
memory usage, and access costs by shortening in-
put lengths and reducing the number of tokens the
model needs to handle during the pre-fill phase,
thereby improving memory efficiency (Wan et al.,
2024c). Additionally, input compression acceler-
ates token generation in autoregressive decoding by
shortening input sequence lengths, thus enhancing
inference efficiency.
Zhou et al. (2024c) propose a review on effi-
cient inference, where input compression being a
significant part of the review. Input compression
mainly focuses on prompt pruning, prompt sum-
marization, and soft prompt compression.
The
core idea of prompt pruning is to delete unim-
portant tokens, sentences, or documents in the in-
put prompt based on predefined or learnable im-
portance metrics. Prompt summarization aims to
compress the original prompt into a shorter sum-
mary while retaining similar semantic information.
Soft prompt compression involves designing a soft
prompt which is a sequence of learnable contin-
uous tokens. It is much shorter than the original
prompt and will be utilized as the input for LLMs.
Among the above-mentioned methods, they usually
need to cooperate with a compression model, such
as a summarization model, to achieve the input
compression.
Prompt Pruning
The core idea behind the
prompt pruning is to remove unimportant tokens,
sentences, or documents, where the cooperation
model targets at prompt pruning. Ali et al. (2024)
utilize graph-construct model to obtain a graph
from the textual information in the prompt and ex-
tracting key information elements from the graph
to obtain the compressed prompt. Pan et al. (2024)
introduce the LLMLingua-2 distillation method,
which classifies each input token using a Trans-
former encoder. Then it preserves the top N to-
kens with the highest classifying probability, cap-
turing all key information for prompt compres-
sion. (Huang et al., 2024b) propose a coarse-to-fine
pruner that initially identifies crucial CoT exam-
ples from a large batch and then further prunes the
unimportant tokens.
Prompt Summarization
The core idea of
prompt summarization is to condense the original
prompt into a shorter summary which preserves the
same semantic information, where the cooperation
model is an extractive or abstractive summarization
model. Liu et al. (2023) propose two compression
methods. The first method trains a summarization
model to compress the context. The second method
further reduces the number of tokens by deleting
words with less semantic impact. RECOMP (Xu
et al., 2023) introduces an abstractive compressor
that takes a question and retrieved documents as in-
put to produce a concise summary. Then the LLM
generate the answer based on the concise summary.
SemanticCompression (Fei et al., 2023) proposes a
method that breaks text into sentences, groups sen-
tences by topic, and then summarizes each group
with pre-trained model. Finally, the LLM generate
the response based on all the groups. To address the
different tasks, Li et al. (2024b) propose PCToolkit,
which consists compressors that are developed with
different targets.
Soft Prompt Compression
Soft prompt com-
pression involves using virtual tokens to assist in
prompt compression, where the cooperation model
is an text feature extractor. For example, SelfCP
(Gao, 2024a) uses a frozen LLM as an encoder and
decoder, inserting special tokens into the prompt to
generate virtual tokens, thereby achieving prompt
12

compression and response generation collaboration.
(Gao, 2024b) projects candidate demonstrations
into virtual tokens via a LLM during in-context
learning, then it selects appropriate demonstrations
based on semantic similarity. Finally, it generates
the response using a frozen LLM.
In general, we can observe that from prompt
pruning to prompt summarization to soft prompt
compression, the compression ratios increase
which results in higher efficiency. However, the
corresponding information loss is also greater.
5.1.2
Speculative Decoding
Draft Generator
LLM
Figure 7: LLMs cooperate with draft generator for spec-
ulative decoding.
The primary focus of decoding acceleration is to
cooperate smaller models to generate drafts, which
are then verified by larger models to expedite infer-
ence (Stern et al., 2018). This approach is currently
referred to as speculative decoding (Leviathan et al.,
2023; Xia et al., 2023). Xia et al. (2024) summa-
rize various drafting strategies, including Indepen-
dent Drafting and Self-Drafting. The drafted to-
kens are then verified in parallel by the target LLM,
with verification methods such as Greedy Decoding
(Gu et al., 2017) and Nucleus Sampling (Holtzman
et al., 2020b). The acceleration effect of specula-
tive decoding largely depends on the acceptance
rate of drafted tokens at each step. This acceptance
rate is influenced by several factors, including the
quality of the drafts, the verification criteria, and
the behavioral consistency between the drafter and
the target LLM.
For instance, Ou et al. (2024) propose the use
of an adaptive N-gram model based on the current
context for the rapid drafting phase, followed by a
verification phase where the original LLM evalu-
ates and confirms the proposed tokens. In addition
to using draft models to reduce the number of actual
model predictions, some studies have introduced
early stopping mechanisms. This method termi-
nates the prediction process early based on specific
conditions, thereby saving computational resources.
For example, Huang et al. (2024a) and Liu et al.
(2024c) propose using probabilistic predictions to
assess the acceptance rate of draft model’s hypothe-
ses, deciding whether to continue generating more
drafts based on predefined thresholds. Furthermore,
Liu et al. (2024d) incorporate an early stopping
mechanism after the initial N layers of the model
during draft hypothesis generation.
5.2
Knowledge Transfer via Cooperation
LLMs typically encompass various capabilities.
However, due to the difficulty in obtaining training
data and the high training costs, directly transfer-
ring knowledge or capabilities from one LLM to
another has attracted significant attention. Consid-
ering that the output probabilities of LLMs often
contain the embedded knowledge of the models,
recent methods have primarily focused on trans-
ferring knowledge between LLMs. For example,
Wan et al. (2024a,b) transfer knowledge from mul-
tiple LLMs to a target model via continued training
with knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015).
Nonetheless, most of the recently proposed meth-
ods focus on cooperation at the inference stage
without involving training and can be categorized
based on their objectives: Mitigating Incorrect
Knowledge, Strengthening Correct Knowledge, and
Supplying New Knowledge.
5.2.1
Mitigating Incorrect Knowledge
Hallucination (Rawte et al., 2023; Huang et al.,
2023) and bias (Wang et al., 2024a) are common is-
sues in LLMs. Ji et al. (2023) argue that LLMs
trained with the next-word prediction objective
store superficial patterns instead of recognizing
real-world knowledge extracted from the training
corpora. Therefore, many studies aim to explore
cooperation methods for removing incorrect knowl-
edge existed in the output logits.
Drawing on the observation that the shortcom-
ings of larger LLMs are even more pronounced in
smaller ones, Li et al. (2023b) propose Contrastive
Decoding (CD). CD encourages token yi selection
from the delta distribution between LLMs and their
corresponding weaker, amateur models, thereby
eliminating incorrect knowledge from output distri-
13

Who discovered the law of gravity?
Albert!
Hmm, his answer 
doesn't seem correct. 
I need to reconsider it.
Amateur Model
Target LLM
Figure 8: Illustration of core idea of CD. The amateur
model is more prone to errors, thus the target LLMs
needs to reconsider the answer accordingly.
butions:
yi ∼log pLLM(yi|y<i)
|
{z
}
vanilla distribution
−log pAMA(yi|y<i)
|
{z
}
amateur distribution
(7)
This work has significantly inspired subsequent
studies. Some studies employ CD to enhance rea-
soning capabilities. O’Brien and Lewis (2023)
demonstrate that CD improves reasoning for LLMs
by preventing certain abstract reasoning errors.
Phan et al. (2024) utilize distillation techniques
to obtain amateur models and perform contrastive
decoding to enhance reasoning capabilities. Ad-
ditionally, some studies use CD for trustworthy
generation. Waldendorf et al. (2024) experiment
with CD in various amateur models for machine
translation, showing that CD reduces hallucinations
in large multilingual machine translation models.
Liu et al. (2021) employ CD for language detoxifi-
cation and sentiment-controlled generation. Zhang
et al. (2023b) and Niu et al. (2024) induce halluci-
nations or toxic content into LLMs by fine-tuning
with non-factual or toxic examples and then use
these models as amateurs for contrastive decoding.
Qu et al. (2024) leverage counterfactual CD for
distractor generation. Some studies explore diverse
contrastive strategies. Shi et al. (2024) observe
that output distributions from an MoE model us-
ing different routing strategies differ substantially,
thus they utilize unchosen experts as the amateur
model to achieve contrastive decoding. Yuan et al.
(2023) combine CD with speculative decoding to
achieve both acceleration in decoding and quality
improvements.
Although CD can help mitigate incorrect knowl-
edge during inference, LLMs and the correspond-
ing amateur models typically belong to the same
family and require aligned output distributions.
5.2.2
Strengthening Correct Knowledge
Beside mitigating hallucination or bias from the
output distributions, another line of research fo-
cuses on enhancing the faithfulness of decoding
outputs to the input or instructions through LLMs
cooperation. This typically involves using addi-
tional models to strengthen the correct knowledge
- increasing the likelihood of potentially correct
outputs. This line of research can be traced back
to studies on attribute-controlled text generation,
which encourage language models to output tokens
that effectively predict the input attributes, thereby
improving faithfulness.Notable examples include
FUDGE (Yang and Klein, 2021) and GEDI (Krause
et al., 2021), which are based on Bayesian factor-
ization:
p(yi|y<i, c) ∝p(yi|y<i) · p(c|yi, y<i)
(8)
yi ∼log pLLM(yi|y<i)
|
{z
}
vanilla distribution
+ log pVER(c|yi, y<i)
|
{z
}
verification
(9)
where c is the input attribute and log p(c|yi, y<i) is
derived from additionally learned attribute predic-
tors, namely verifier. It should be noted that any
suitable model, including the LLM itself, can serve
as the verifier.
Who discovered the law of gravity?
I am confused.
“Albert” and “Isaac” seems 
both correct.
Target LLM
LLM Verifier
I prefer “Isaac”.
Figure 9: Illustration of core idea of verification based
methods. The LLM verifier needs to check and assist
selecting the correct output from candidates.
Recently, Deng and Raffel (2023) employ an
auxiliary reward model as the verifier to encour-
age LLMs to generate text that has certain prop-
erties. Tu et al. (2023) verify each decoding posi-
tion according to equation (9) in language genera-
tion tasks, enhancing the faithfulness of LLMs. To
achieve accurate verification with sufficient infor-
mation, Lu et al. (2024a) introduce DIVER, which
employs dynamic token spans that can potentially
be generated to calculate point-wise mutual infor-
mation (PMI) for verification. Additionally, they
14

demonstrate that using smaller LLMs for verifica-
tion can alleviate the decrease in inference speed
without significantly affecting performance.
5.2.3
Supplying New Knowledge
Recently, some studies have observed that the vari-
ation of output logits reflect the variation of LLMs
capabilities. Inspired by this, they propose to tune
larger LLMs without training. Instead, they mod-
ify the output logits to provide new capabilities
extracted smaller LLMs:
log pLARGE-C(yi|y<i) ∝log pLARGE(yi|y<i)
|
{z
}
vanilla distribution
+ [log pSMALL-C(yi|y<i) −log pSMALL(yi|y<i)]
|
{z
}
capability reflection
(10)
where LARGE-C and SMALL-C refers to models
with specific capability while LARGE and SMALL
refers to the original models.
Ormazabal et al. (2023) and Liu et al. (2024a)
separately propose emulated tuning and proxy tun-
ing, extracting Chat capability from smaller LLMs
and integrate the capability into larger LLMs with
the aforementioned equation (10).
Zhao et al.
(2024b) employ safe and unsafe smaller models
to adversarially modify a significantly larger safe
model’s decoding probabilities, achieving jailbreak-
ing for LLMs.
The above methods require that both small and
large LLMs share the same vocabulary. To address
this issue, Zhou et al. (2024b) introduce weak-to-
strong search, utilizing the log-likelihood differ-
ence between small tuned and untuned LLMs as
rewards to guide the decoding of larger LLMs with
tree search, mitigating the need for shared vocabu-
laries.
5.3
Compensatory Cooperation
In practical applications, large models still face
some uncontrollable issues due to their lack of in-
terpretability (Zhao et al., 2024a). Therefore, it
is necessary to introduce additional controllers to
compensate for the deficiencies of LLMs. Depend-
ing on the desired properties, controllers can be
served as: 1) detector, 2) retriever, etc..
5.3.1
Detector
LLMs may generate incorrect responses or halluci-
nations due to a lack of relevant knowledge. There-
fore, detecting hallucinations in LLMs is crucial
Who discovered the law of gravity?
“Albert”.
Target LLM
Detector
You are wrong.
Figure 10: LLMs cooperate with detector.
for ensuring the reliability and credibility of gener-
ated content. We introduce related work from two
types of hallucinations: factual hallucinations and
faithfulness hallucinations.
Factual Hallucinations.
Factuality hallucination
emphasizes the discrepancy between generated con-
tent and verifiable real-world facts (Bai et al., 2024).
Current mainstream methods for detecting factual
hallucinations can be divided into: 1) retrieve exter-
nal facts: identifying factual inaccuracies by com-
paring the model-generated content against exter-
nal knowledge sources (Min et al., 2023b; Tang
et al., 2024). 2) uncertainty estimation: retrieving
external facts introduces additional cost. Therefore,
several methods rely on internal knowledge to alle-
viate hallucinations (Chen et al., 2024; Tsai et al.,
2024). Among them, the cooperation studies of
LLMs mainly falls into the first category.
Some studies directly utilizes additional models
as detectors to identify fact errors in the output
of LLMs. RARR (Gao et al., 2022) leverages a
NLI model to evaluate the factulity between the
generated sentences and evidence. Consider that
some evidence may not fully support a claim, thus
Factcheck (Wang et al., 2023c) identifies the stance
of evidences and gathers the relevant evidence,
then it uses RARR to determine whether the gath-
ered evidence supports the original text. Addition-
ally, to detect the factuality of the model regarding
complex multi-step problems, PROGRAMFC (Pan
et al., 2023) decomposes complex claims into sim-
pler sub-tasks that can be solved using question-
answer module, NLI module, in-context learning
module. However, single-pass verification can-
not fully utilize the experience gained from sim-
ilar cases and may repeat past errors. Therefore,
SALAM (Wang and Li, 2023) exploits a auxiliary
model to assist the main LLM in learning from
mistakes through interactive cooperation model.
Other studies exploits auxiliary models to col-
15

lect relevant evidence for verification (Chen et al.,
2023c; Huo et al., 2023; Ousidhoum et al., 2022;
Yao et al., 2022). Huo et al. (2023) adopt infor-
mation retrieval model to obtain related passages
for factual detecting. The retrieved documents con-
tain up to several thousand words, which becomes
cumbersome for both humans and models to make
a judgment based on them. Therefore, Chen et al.
(2023c) compress retrieved text with an summa-
rization model and obtains relevant claims, which
is provided for verifying the fact of LLMs output.
Faithfulness Hallucinations.
Faithfulness hallu-
cination refers to the divergence of generated con-
tent from user instructions or the context provided
by the input (Bai et al., 2024). The current main-
stream methods for detecting faithfulness hallucina-
tions can be divided into: 1) rule-based: which mea-
sures the overlap of pivotal facts between the gen-
erated content and the source content (Nan et al.,
2021; Goodrich et al., 2019); 2) classifier-based,
leveraging trained classifiers to obtain the degree
of entailment between the generated and the source
content (Falke et al., 2019; Mishra et al., 2021);
3) QA-driven, employing question-answering sys-
tems to verify the consistency between the gener-
ated and the source content; 4) uncertainty esti-
mation, which evaluates faithfulness by assessing
the model’s confidence in its generated outputs;
5) prompting-based, where LLMs are prompted to
function as evaluators, assessing the faithfulness
of generated content through specific prompting
strategies. Among these, the collaborative stud-
ies of LLMs mainly falls into categories 2) and 3).
Their difference mainly lies in the use of different
cooperation models for hallucination detection.
The classifier-based methods employ NLI mod-
els to filter out generated sentences that is not sup-
ported by the fact of evidence document (Chen
et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2024c). Chen et al.
(2023b) exploit an NLI model to make entailment
decisions for each document sentence and answer
sentence pair, then aggregates the results by taking
the maximum value over all the pairs. To avoid ob-
taining hallucinated information in the processs of
retrieval, Wang et al. (2024c) utilize an NLI model
to determine whether the retrived passages indeed
entail the target information. The QA-driven meth-
ods apply QA model to obtain the faithfulness of
the generation. Qiu et al. (2023) formulate faith-
fulness evaluation as binary classification problem.
Then it develop a classifier to distill knowledge
from QAFactEval (Fabbri et al., 2022).
In brief, by collaborating with a different detec-
tors, LLMs can often verify or correct some errors,
thereby alleviating the issue of uncontrolled con-
tent generation.
5.3.2
Retriever
Who discovered the law of gravity?
Target LLM
Retriver
I don’t know. I need 
relevant materials.
The law of gravitation is 
a basic law in physics. 
“Isaac” proposes the 
law of gravitation.
Figure 11: LLMs cooperate with retriever.
The information possessed by LLMs is limited.
To extend the knowledge of large models, retrieval
augmentation generation (RAG) (Gao et al., 2024)
aims to use external data sources to assist text gen-
eration. Collaborative models serve as bridges to
external knowledge, assisting in the retrieval of in-
formation. The cooperation models for retrieving
different types of data vary significantly, including:
1) unstructured data; 2) structured data.
For unstructured data, such as text, some stud-
ies retrieve world knowledge to expand the corpus
of the LLMs. Izacard et al. (2022) start by re-
trieving the top-k relevant documents from a large
corpus of text with Contriever (Izacard et al., 2021).
Then, these documents are fed to the LLM, along
with the query, which in turns generates the out-
put. Besides, it is inconvenient to train language
models with special cross attention mechanisms
to encode the retrieved text. Thus REPLUG (Ma
et al., 2023a) treats the LLMs as a black box and
augments it with a tuneable retrieval model. Ma
et al. (2023b) note that there is inevitably a gap
between the input text and the needed knowledge
in retrieval. Therefore, to better align the query to
the retriver, it adopts a small language model as a
trainable rewriter to cater to the black-box LLM
reader. Howerver, query rewriting lacks the uti-
lization of effective and general signals. Therefore,
RaFe (Mao et al., 2024) first trains an initial query
rewriting model by standard supervised fine-tuning,
Subsequently, it utilizes the ranking scores from
the reranker to conduct feedback training on the
query rewriting model.
16

For structured data, such as knowledge graph
and SQL, it requires additional effort to convert
structured data to text (Li et al., 2024d; Su et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2023a; He et al., 2024). There-
fore, the retriever needs to have the ability to con-
vert between natural language and structured lan-
guage. For knowledge graph, the retriever is an
entity linking model to retrieve relative structured
knowledge (Su et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023a).
Additionally, for SQL knowledge, the retriever is
a query generator that allows the generation of
queries for various types of query languages, in-
cluding SPARQL, SQL, and natural sentences (Li
et al., 2024d; Zha et al., 2023).
5.4
Federated Cooperation
Data Sharing
Server LLM
Client SLM
Figure 12: LLMs cooperate with client models in feder-
ated learning.
Large-scale language models have received in-
creasing attention, but they face many challenges in
real-world applications. These challenges mainly
stem from the scarcity of public domain data and
the need to maintain privacy for private data. To ad-
dress these issues, federated learning (FL) (Li et al.,
2020) has emerged as a very promising technology
because it can protect private data while allowing
the sharing of public models. Federated learning
can be mainly divided into two parts: federated
training and federated prompt engineering (Chen
et al., 2023a). Existing collaborative studies are
distributed across two aspects mentioned above.
5.4.1
Federated Training
The knowledge of the LLMs on the server can be
transferred to the small language models on the
client, while the unique knowledge of the client
can enrich the distribution of the LLMs. Conse-
quently, the above methods greatly expand the pre-
training corpora for both LLMs and small models
(Fan et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024). To bridge the
gap in the simultaneous mutual enhancement of
both the servers’ LLM and clients’ SLMs, Fan et al.
(2024) develop FedMKT, a parameter-efficient fed-
erated mutual knowledge transfer framework for
large and small language models. Ye et al. (2024)
build a research-friendly framework, called Open-
FedLLM, where multiple data owners collabora-
tively train a shared model without transmitting raw
data. Additionally, to minimize resource consump-
tion of parameters exchange, FedCyBGD (Wang
et al., 2024d) design a compression scheme to fur-
ther decrease the model download.
5.4.2
Federated Prompt Engineering
The goal of large model collaboration is to protect
user privacy while efficiently executing commands.
Therefore, using local small models to protect user
privacy and cloud large models to execute user com-
mands is a feasible approach (Zhang et al., 2024b;
Li et al., 2024a; Guo et al., 2022). For example,
Zhang et al. (2024b) deploy the small model locally
to convert user instructions into general instruc-
tions. The large model in the cloud executes these
general instructions and then returns the results
to the local device. Because of discrepancies be-
tween LLMs’ generated data and clients’ domain-
specific data, the exsiting methods cannot yield
substantial improvements in the domain-specific
tasks. Therefore, it introduces FDKT framework,
which enables LLMs to augment data based on
domain-specific few-shot demonstrations (Li et al.,
2024a). Furthermore, FL may cost excessive train-
ing time for convergence and produce inaccurate
models. PromptFL (Guo et al., 2022) introduces
prompt learner which updates the prompts instead
of the whole model. Therefore, both the local train-
ing and the global aggregation can be significantly
accelerated.
In addition to the aspects discussed above, we
want to emphasize that cooperation among LLMs
is a very broad research area. Topics such as RLHF
and the use of agents also fall under LLM coop-
eration. As these topics have been extensively re-
viewed (Kaufmann et al., 2023; Xi et al., 2023; Sun
et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024), we do not cover
them in the current version of our paper but will
address them in future work.
17

6
Challenges and Future Directions
6.1
Flexible LLMs Merging Methods
Current LLM merging methods are typically re-
stricted to models with same architecture and com-
patible parameters. However, most open-source
LLMs are heterogeneous, rendering current merg-
ing methods ineffective.
Interestingly, Xu et al. (2024b) demonstrate that
the token embeddings of heterogeneous LLMs can
be projected into a common space by using over-
lapping tokens as a bridge. However, this method
cannot be successfully adapted to other parame-
ters of LLMs, such as self-attention layers and
feed-forward layers, due to the lack of aligned neu-
rons and the complexity of parameter distributions.
We believe that explore the highly correlated neu-
rons (Singh and Jaggi, 2020; Peña et al., 2023;
Ainsworth et al., 2023; Jordan et al., 2023; Sto-
ica et al., 2024) in diverse LLMs hold significant
potential and interest. Such advancements could
revolutionize model fusion techniques, enhancing
their flexibility and practicality.
6.2
Balanced Speed and Performance for
LLM Ensemble
As we discussed in §4.1.4, different LLM ensem-
ble methods have their own strengths and weak-
nesses. Achieving a balance between speed and
performance can be challenging.
LLM ensemble methods employed BEFORE in-
ference typically select a appropriate LLM for cur-
rent example according to the pre-trained routers
(Shnitzer et al., 2023). While these methods im-
prove decoding speed, they are coarse-grained and
do not fully harness the potential of ensemble learn-
ing. In contrast, methods used DURING inference
operate at a finer granularity, achieving ensemble
integration at the token level (Xu et al., 2024b;
Huang et al., 2024c; Yu et al., 2024). Such meth-
ods can alleviate errors at each decoding step via
ensemble, relieving exploration bias (Ranzato et al.,
2015; Xu et al., 2020) and holding greater promise
for enhancing performance. However, these meth-
ods suffer from the slower inference speed. Effec-
tively combining these two strategies may strike a
balance between speed and performance improve-
ments, benefiting practical deployments.
6.3
Broader Applications via Cooperation
This work primarily discusses several objectives
achievable through cooperation among LLMs, in-
cluding: efficient computation, knowledge trans-
ferring, compensatory cooperation and federated
cooperation. Given the remarkable emergent ca-
pabilities of LLMs, we believe that a wide range
of applications can be realized through flexible
and judicious cooperation between different LLMs.
For example, exploring cross-domain applications,
where LLMs can combine their expertise in various
fields will unlock new possibilities. Additionally,
human-centered collaboration is also a promising
direction (Ma et al., 2024).
7
Conclusion
This work presents a survey of collaboration strate-
gies for LLMs, categorized into three aspects:
merging, ensemble, and cooperation. For each
aspect, we provide a detailed classification and an
in-depth review of advanced approaches. We be-
lieve that the collaboration of LLMs will play an
increasingly important role in future research and
hope that this paper offers valuable insights into
future research directions.
18
