Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
AUTOMATED DESIGN OF AGENTIC SYSTEMS
Shengran Hu1,2, Cong Lu1,2, Jeff Clune1,2,3
1University of British Columbia, 2Vector Institute, 3Canada CIFAR AI Chair
{srhu,conglu}@cs.ubc.ca, jclune@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Researchers are investing substantial effort in developing powerful general-
purpose agents, wherein Foundation Models are used as modules within agen-
tic systems (e.g. Chain-of-Thought, Self-Reflection, Toolformer). However, the
history of machine learning teaches us that hand-designed solutions are eventu-
ally replaced by learned solutions. We describe a newly forming research area,
Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS), which aims to automatically cre-
ate powerful agentic system designs, including inventing novel building blocks
and/or combining them in new ways. We further demonstrate that there is an un-
explored yet promising approach within ADAS where agents can be defined in
code and new agents can be automatically discovered by a meta agent program-
ming ever better ones in code. Given that most programming languages are Turing
Complete, this approach theoretically enables the learning of any possible agentic
system: including novel prompts, tool use, workflows, and combinations thereof.
We present a simple yet effective algorithm named Meta Agent Search to demon-
strate this idea, where a meta agent iteratively programs interesting new agents
based on an ever-growing archive of previous discoveries. Through extensive ex-
periments across multiple domains including coding, science, and math, we show
that our algorithm can progressively invent agents with novel designs that greatly
outperform state-of-the-art hand-designed agents. Importantly, we consistently
observe the surprising result that agents invented by Meta Agent Search maintain
superior performance even when transferred across domains and models, demon-
strating their robustness and generality. Provided we develop it safely, our work
illustrates the potential of an exciting new research direction toward automatically
designing ever-more powerful agentic systems to benefit humanity. All code is
open-sourced at https://github.com/ShengranHu/ADAS.
1
INTRODUCTION
Foundation Models (FMs) such as GPT (OpenAI, 2024; 2022) and Claude (Anthropic, 2024b) are
quickly being adopted as powerful general-purpose agents for agentic tasks that need flexible rea-
soning and planning (Wang et al., 2024). Despite recent advancements in FMs, solving problems re-
liably often requires an agent to be a compound agentic system with multiple components instead of
a monolithic model query (Zaharia et al., 2024; Rockt¨aschel, 2024). Additionally, to enable agents to
solve complex real-world tasks, they often need access to external tools such as search engines, code
execution, and database queries. As a result, many effective building blocks of agentic systems have
been proposed, such as chain-of-thought planning and reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023;
Hu & Clune, 2024), memory structures (Zhang et al., 2024c; Lewis et al., 2020), tool use (Schick
et al., 2023; Qu et al., 2024), and self-reflection (Madaan et al., 2024; Shinn et al., 2023). Although
these agents have already seen significant success across various applications (Wang et al., 2024),
developing these building blocks and combining them into complex agentic systems often requires
domain-specific manual tuning and substantial effort from both researchers and engineers.
However, the history of machine learning reveals a recurring theme: manually created artifacts be-
come replaced by learned, more efficient solutions (Clune, 2019) over time as we get more compute
and data (Sutton, 2019). An early example is from computer vision, where hand-designed features
like HOG (Dalal & Triggs, 2005) were eventually replaced by learned features from Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs, Krizhevsky et al. (2012)). More recently, AutoML methods (Hutter et al.,
1
arXiv:2408.08435v2  [cs.AI]  2 Mar 2025

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Summary and motivation: “Based on 
the insights from previous agents …”,
Name: “Divide and Conquer Agent”,
Code: “def forward(Task):
 
……
 
return Answer”
Meta Agent
Next interesting agent
Agent Archive
Test performance on tasks
Input
Refine until novel 
and error-free
Examples of Discovered Agents
Multi-step Peer Review Agent
Experts
Answers
Reviewers
Task
Verified Multimodal Agent
Task
Visual 
Paradigm
Verifier
Verified 
Paradigm
Visual 
Analyzer
COT
Answer
Task
Sub-problem 
Division
sub
sub
sub
sub
sub
Experts
Answers
Ensemble
Answer
Divide and Conquer Agent
Reviews
and add to archive
New Agent
…
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed algorithm Meta Agent Search and examples of discovered
agents. In our algorithm, we instruct the “meta” agent to iteratively program new agents, test their
performance on tasks, add them to an archive of discovered agents, and use this archive to inform the
meta agent in subsequent iterations. We show three example agents across our runs, with all names
generated by the meta agent. The detailed code of example agents can be found in Appendix G.
2019) and AI-Generating Algorithms (AI-GAs, Clune (2019)) have also demonstrated the superior-
ity of learned AI systems compared to hand-designed AI systems. For example, the current best-
performing CNN models come from Neural Architecture Search (Elsken et al., 2019; Shen et al.,
2023) instead of manual design; in LLM alignment, learned loss functions (Lu et al., 2024a) out-
perform most hand-designed ones such as DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024); The AI Scientist (Lu et al.,
2024b) demonstrates an automated research pipeline, including the development of novel ML algo-
rithms; and an endless number of robotics learning environments can be automatically generated in
works like OMNI-EPIC (Faldor et al., 2024), which demonstrate surprising creativity in generated
environments and allow more efficient environment creation than the manual approach (see more
examples in Section 5). Therefore, in this paper, we propose a new research question: Can we
automate the design of agentic systems?
To explore the above research question, we describe a newly forming research area we call
Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS), which aims to automatically invent novel build-
ing blocks and design powerful agentic systems (Section 2). We argue that ADAS may prove to
be the fastest path to developing powerful agents, and show initial evidence that learned agents can
greatly outperform hand-designed agents. Considering the tremendous number of building blocks
yet to be discovered in agentic systems (Section 5), it would take a long time for our research com-
munity to discover them all. Even if we successfully discover most of the useful building blocks,
combining them into effective agentic systems for massive real-world applications would still be
challenging and time-consuming, given the many different ways the building blocks can combine
and interact with each other. In contrast, with ADAS, the building blocks and agents can be learned
in an automated fashion. ADAS may not only potentially save human effort in developing powerful
agents but also could be a faster path to more effective solutions than manual design.
Although a few existing works can be considered as ADAS methods, most of them focus only on
designing prompts (Yang et al., 2024; Fernando et al., 2024), greatly limiting their ability to invent
flexible design patterns in agents (Section 5). In this paper, we show that there is an unexplored
yet promising approach to ADAS where we can define the entire agentic system in code and new
agents can be automatically discovered by a “meta” agent programming ever better ones in code.
Given that most programming languages, such as Python, which we use in this paper, are Turing
Complete (Boyer & Moore, 1983; Ladha, 2024), searching within a code space theoretically enables
an ADAS algorithm to discover any possible agentic systems, including all components such as
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
prompts, tool use, workflows, and more. Furthermore, with recent FMs being increasingly proficient
in coding, we can use FMs as meta agents to create new agents in code for ADAS, enabling novel
agents to be programmed in an automated manner.
Following the aforementioned ideas, we present Meta Agent Search in this paper as one of the first
algorithms in ADAS that enables complete design in code space (Figure 1). The core concept of
Meta Agent Search is to instruct a meta agent to iteratively create interestingly new agents, evaluate
them, add them to an archive that stores discovered agents, and use this archive to help the meta agent
in subsequent iterations create yet more interestingly new agents. Similar to existing open-endedness
algorithms that leverage human notions of interestingness (Zhang et al., 2024a; Lu et al., 2024c),
we encourage the meta agent to explore interesting (e.g., novel or worthwhile) agents. To validate
the proposed approach, we evaluate the proposed Meta Agent Search on: (1) the challenging ARC
logic puzzle task (Chollet, 2019) that aims to test the general intelligence of an AI system, (2) four
popular benchmarks on reading comprehension, math, science questions, and multi-task problem
solving, and (3) the transferability of discovered agents to held-out domains and models (Section 4).
Our experiments show that the discovered agents substantially outperform state-of-the-art hand-
designed baselines. For instance, our agents improve F1 scores on reading comprehension tasks
in DROP (Dua et al., 2019) by 13.6/100 and accuracy rates on math tasks in MGSM (Shi et al.,
2023) by 14.4%. Additionally, they improve accuracy over baselines by 25.9% and 13.2% on
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and GSM-Hard (Gao et al., 2023) math tasks, respectively, after trans-
ferring across domains. The promising performance of our algorithm over hand-designed solutions
illustrates the potential of ADAS in automating the design of agentic systems. Furthermore, the
experiments demonstrate that the discovered agents not only perform well when transferring across
similar domains but also exhibit strong performance when transferring across dissimilar domains,
such as from mathematics to reading comprehension. This highlights the robustness and transfer-
ability of the agentic systems discovered by Meta Agent Search. In conclusion, our work opens up
many exciting research directions and encourages further studies (Section 6).
2
AUTOMATED DESIGN OF AGENTIC SYSTEMS (ADAS)
Search Space
E.g. Agents defined by code
Search Algorithm
E.g. LLM defines agents using code
Evaluation Function
E.g. Accuracy on the task
Where is the 
capital of Canada
Ottawa
Sample
New Agent
Evaluate the 
Objectives
Agent
……
1 + 1 = ?
LLM
Figure 2: The three key components of Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS). The
search space determines which agentic systems can be represented in ADAS. The search algorithm
specifies how the ADAS method explores the search space. The evaluation function defines how to
evaluate a candidate agent on target objectives such as performance.
At the time of writing, the community has not reached a consensus on the definitions or terminolo-
gies of agents. Here, by agents we refer to agentic systems that involve Foundation Models (FMs) as
modules in the workflow to solve tasks by planning, using tools, and carrying out multiple, iterative
steps of processing (Chase, 2024; Ng, 2024). In this paper, we describe a newly forming research
area Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS). Similar to research areas in AI-GAs (Clune,
2019) and AutoML (Hutter et al., 2019), such as Neural Architecture Search (Elsken et al., 2019), we
formulate ADAS as an optimization process and identify three key components of ADAS algorithms
(Figure 2).
Formulation
Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS) involves using a search algorithm to dis-
cover agentic systems across a search space that optimize an evaluation function.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
• Search Space: The search space defines which agentic systems can be represented and thus
discovered in ADAS. For example, works like PromptBreeder (Fernando et al., 2024) mutate
only the text prompts of an agent, but their other components, such as workflow, remain the same.
Thus, in these search spaces, agents that have a different workflow than the predefined one can not
be represented. Existing works also explore search spaces such as graph structures (Zhuge et al.,
2024) and feed-forward networks (Liu et al., 2023).
• Search Algorithm: The search algorithm defines how ADAS algorithms explore the search space.
Since the search space is often very large or even unbounded, the exploration-exploitation trade-
off (Sutton & Barto, 2018) should be considered. Ideally, the algorithm can both quickly discover
high-performance agentic systems and avoid remaining stuck in a local optimum. Existing ap-
proaches include using Reinforcement Learning (Zhuge et al., 2024) or an FM iteratively gener-
ating new solutions (Fernando et al., 2024) as search algorithms.
• Evaluation Function: Depending on the application of the ADAS algorithm, we may consider
different objectives to optimize, such as performance, cost, latency, or safety of agents. An eval-
uation function defines how to evaluate a candidate agent on those objectives. For example, to
assess the agent’s performance on unseen future data, a simple method is to calculate the accuracy
rate on the validation data for a task, which is commonly adopted in existing works (Zhuge et al.,
2024; Fernando et al., 2024).
Although many search space designs are possible and some have already been explored (Section 5),
there is an unexplored yet promising approach where we can define the entire agentic system in
code and new agents can be automatically discovered by a meta agent programming ever better ones
in code. Searching within a code space theoretically enables the ADAS algorithm to discover any
possible building blocks (e.g., prompts, tool use, workflow) and agentic systems that combine any
of these building blocks in any way. This approach also offers better interpretability for agent design
patterns since the program code is often readable, making debugging easier and enhancing AI safety.
Additionally, compared to search spaces using networks (Liu et al., 2023) or graphs (Zhuge et al.,
2024), searching in a code space allows us to more easily build on existing human efforts. For ex-
ample, it is possible to search within open-source agent frameworks like LangChain (LangChainAI,
2022) and build upon all existing building blocks (e.g., RAG, search engine tools). Finally, since
FMs are proficient in coding, utilizing a code search space allows us to leverage existing expertise
from FMs during the search process. In contrast, search algorithms in custom search spaces, such as
graphs, may be much less efficient due to the absence of these priors. Therefore, we argue that the
approach of using programming languages as the search space should be studied more in ADAS.
3
OUR ALGORITHM: META AGENT SEARCH
In this section, we present Meta Agent Search, a simple yet effective algorithm to demonstrate the
approach of defining and searching for agents in code. The core idea of Meta Agent Search is to
adopt FMs as meta agents to iteratively program interestingly new agents based on an ever-growing
archive of previous discoveries. Although any possible building blocks and agentic systems can
theoretically be programmed by the meta agent from scratch, it is inefficient in practice to avoid
providing the meta agent any basic functions such as FM query APIs or existing tools. Therefore,
in this paper, we define a simple framework (within 100 lines of code) for the meta agent, providing
it with a basic set of essential functions like querying FMs or formatting prompts. As a result, the
meta agent only needs to program a “forward” function to define a new agentic system, similar to
the practice in FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024). This function takes in the information of
the task and outputs the agent’s response to the task. Details of the framework codes and examples
of the agents defined with this framework can be found in Appendix C.
As shown in Figure 1, the core idea of Meta Agent Search is to have a meta agent iteratively program
new agents in code. The algorithm proceeds as follows: (1) The archive is (optionally) initialized
with baseline agents such as Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022) and Self-Refine (Madaan et al.,
2024; Shinn et al., 2023). (2) Conditioned on the archive, the meta agent designs a new agent by
generating a high-level description of the new idea for an agentic system and then implementing it in
code. The design then undergoes two self-reflection (Madaan et al., 2024; Shinn et al., 2023) steps by
the meta agent to ensure it is novel. (3) The generated agent is evaluated using validation data from
the target domain. If errors occur during evaluation, the meta agent performs a self-reflection step to
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
refine the design, repeating this process up to five times if necessary. (4) Finally, the agent is added
to the archive along with its evaluation metrics, and the process continues with the updated archive
until the maximum number of iterations is reached. A pseudocode of the algorithm is provided in
Appendix H.
Similar to existing open-endedness algorithms that leverage human notions of interesting-
ness (Zhang et al., 2024a; Lu et al., 2024c), we encourage the meta agent to explore interestingly
new (e.g., novel or worthwhile) agents based on an ever-growing archive of previous discoveries.
Here, we calculate the performance (e.g., success rate or F1 score) as the metrics for the meta agent
to maximize. The prompt and more details are presented in Appendix B.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We conduct extensive experiments on: (1) the ARC challenge (Chollet, 2019) (Section 4.1), (2) four
popular benchmarks assessing the agent’s abilities on reading comprehension, math, science ques-
tions, and multi-task problem solving (Section 4.2), and (3) the transferability of discovered agents
on math to held-out math tasks and non-math tasks (Section 4.3). We use an identical implemen-
tation of the algorithm across different tasks, with the only variation being task-specific descriptive
text included in the prompt (details are available in Appendix B). Across all experiments, we find
that the discovered agents substantially outperform baseline state-of-the-art hand-designed agents
and maintain superior performance even when transferred across domains and models.
4.1
CASE STUDY: ARC CHALLENGE
0
5
10
15
20
25
Iteration
4
6
8
10
12
14
Held-out Test Accuracy (%)
Initially tested generating high-level strategies
before implementing low-level details.
An important strategy emerged: using multiple COTs
to generate possible answers, refining them, and
finally ensembling the best answers.
Introduced dynamic memory for doing more refinements.
Scaled up the previous idea.
Best agent: introduced multiple
critics for enhanced refinement.
Meta-Agent Search on ARC
Chain-of-Thought
Self-Refine
LLM Debate
COT-SC
Quality-Diversity
Meta-Agent Search
(a)
Task
5 COTs
5 Answers
Human-like 
Critic
Feedback
Efficiency Expert
Readability Expert
Simplicity Expert
Experts
Feedback
Refinement
3 times
All 
Answers
Evaluate
Top-3 
Answers
Ensemble
Final 
Answer
Structured Feedback and Ensemble Agent
The Best Discovered Agent on ARC
(b)
Figure 3: The results of Meta Agent Search on the ARC challenge. (a) Meta Agent Search
progressively discovers high-performance agents based on an ever-growing archive of previous dis-
coveries. We report the median accuracy and the 95% bootstrap confidence interval on a held-out test
set by evaluating agents five times. (b) The visualization of the best agent discovered by Meta Agent
Search on the ARC challenge. Detailed implementation of this agent is available in Appendix D.
We first demonstrate how Meta Agent Search discovers novel agentic systems and outperforms ex-
isting state-of-the-art hand-designed agents in the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) chal-
lenge (Chollet, 2019). This challenge aims to evaluate the general intelligence of AI systems through
their ability to acquire new skills. Questions in ARC include (1) showing multiple examples of vi-
sual input-output grid patterns, (2) the AI system learning the transformation rule of grid patterns
from examples, and (3) predicting the output grid pattern given a test input grid pattern. Since each
question in ARC has a unique transformation rule, it requires the AI system to learn efficiently with
few-shot examples, leveraging capabilities in number counting, geometry, and topology.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Setup.
Following common practice (Greenblatt, 2024), we require the agent to write code for the
transformation rule instead of answering directly. We provide tool functions in the framework (de-
scribed in Section 3) that evaluate the generated transformation code. Given the significant challenge
that ARC poses to current AI systems, we sample our data from questions with grid dimensions
≤5 × 5 in the “Public Training Set (Easy)”. We sample a validation set and a test set with 20 and
60 questions, respectively, for searching and testing. We calculate the validation and test accuracy
of an agent by assessing it over the validation and test sets five times to reduce the variance from the
stochastic sampling of FMs. We evaluate all discovered agents on the held-out test set and report
the test accuracy in Figure 3. Meta Agent Search runs for 25 iterations and the meta agent uses
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024), while discovered agents and baselines are evaluated using GPT-3.5 (Ope-
nAI, 2022) to reduce compute cost. More algorithmic details and examples of ARC questions can
be found in Appendix D.
Baselines.
We compared against five state-of-the-art hand-designed agents: (1) Chain-of-Thought
(COT, Wei et al. (2022)), which instructs the agent to output the reasoning before answering to
improve complex problem-solving through intermediate steps; (2) Self-Consistency with Chain-of-
Thought (COT-SC, Wang et al. (2023b)), which ensembles multiple parallel answers from COT to
produce a more accurate answer; (3) Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2024; Shinn et al., 2023), which
allows iterative self-reflection to correct mistakes made in previous attempts; (4) LLM-Debate (Du
et al., 2023), which enables different LLMs to debate with each other, leveraging diverse perspec-
tives to find better answers; (5) Quality-Diversity, a simplified version of Intelligent Go-Explore (Lu
et al., 2024c), which produces and ensembles diverse answers to better explore potential solutions.
The selected baselines represent widely adopted agent designs in the agent literature, embodying
key design patterns and approaches frequently utilized across various applications. By “state-of-
the-art,” we refer to these baseline designs as exemplifying important advancements and practices
within the field. We also use all baselines as initial seeds in the archive for Meta Agent Search, with
additional results for empty initialization provided in Appendix I. To ensure fair comparisons, all
baseline implementations were developed using the same framework as the Meta Agent, providing
a consistent and equitable evaluation environment. More details about baselines can be found in
Appendix F.
Results and Analysis.
As shown in Figure 3a, Meta Agent Search effectively and progressively
discovers agents that perform better than state-of-the-art hand-designed baselines. Important break-
throughs are highlighted in the text boxes. As is critical in prior works on open-endedness and
AI-GAs (Zhang et al., 2024a; Faldor et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2019; 2020; Lehman & Stanley,
2011), Meta Agent Search innovates based on a growing archive of previous stepping stones. For
example, an important design pattern emerged in iteration 3 where it uses multiple COTs to gener-
ate possible answers, refines them, and finally ensembles the best answers. This became a crucial
stepping stone that subsequent designs tended to utilize. Additionally, the best-discovered agent is
shown in Figure 3b, where a complex feedback mechanism is adopted to refine answers more effec-
tively. Careful observation of the search progress reveals that this sophisticated feedback mechanism
did not appear suddenly. Instead, the ideas of incorporating diverse feedback, evaluating for various
specific traits (via experts) such as efficiency and simplicity, and simulating human-like feedback
emerged in iterations 5, 11, and 12, respectively. The final mechanism is an innovation based on
these three stepping stones. This illustrates that even though these stepping stones did not achieve
high performance immediately upon emergence, later discoveries benefited from these innovations
by combining different stepping stones, resembling crossover in evolution via LLMs (Meyerson
et al., 2023). Overall, the results showcase the potential of ADAS and the effectiveness of Meta
Agent Search to progressively discover agents that outperform state-of-the-art hand-designed base-
lines and invent novel design patterns through the innovation and combination of stepping stones.
4.2
REASONING AND PROBLEM-SOLVING DOMAINS
Setup.
Next, we investigate the potential of our algorithm to improve the capabilities of agents
across math, reading, and reasoning domains. We test Meta Agent Search on four popular bench-
marks: (1) DROP (Dua et al., 2019) for evaluating Reading Comprehension; (2) MGSM (Shi et al.,
2023) for evaluating Math capability under a multi-lingual setting; (3) MMLU (Hendrycks et al.,
2021) for evaluating Multi-task Problem Solving; and (4) GPQA (Rein et al., 2023) for evaluating
the capability of solving hard (graduate-level) questions in Science. The search is conducted inde-
pendently within each domain. Meta Agent Search runs for 30 iterations. The meta agent uses GPT-
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
4 (OpenAI, 2024), while the discovered agents and baselines are evaluated using GPT-3.5 (OpenAI,
2022). More details about datasets and experiment settings can be found in Appendix E.
Baselines.
We adopt all baselines introduced in Section 4.1. Additionally, since the above do-
mains require strong reasoning skills, we include two additional baselines that specifically focus
on enhancing the reasoning capabilities of agents for a more thorough comparison: (1) Step-back
Abstraction (Zheng et al., 2023), which instructs agents to first consider the principles involved in
solving the task for better reasoning; (2) Role Assignment (Xu et al., 2023), which assigns different
roles to FMs to obtain better answers. Furthermore, we compare our approach with the state-of-the-
art prompt optimization baseline OPRO (Yang et al., 2024) to highlight the advantages of learning
all possible components of agents rather than focusing solely on prompts. More details about the
baselines can be found in Appendix F.
Table 1: Performance comparison between Meta Agent Search and state-of-the-art hand-
designed agents across multiple domains. Meta Agent Search discovers superior agents compared
to the baselines in every domain. We report the test accuracy and the 95% bootstrap confidence in-
terval on held-out test sets. The search is conducted independently for each domain. Here, and in all
tables below, we bold the entry with the highest performance for each domain, as well as all entries
whose median falls within the 95% confidence interval of the highest-performing treatment.
Agent Name
F1 Score
Accuracy (%)
Reading Comprehension
Math
Multi-task
Science
State-of-the-art Hand-designed Agents
Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022)
64.2 ± 0.9
28.0 ± 3.1
65.4 ± 3.3
29.2 ± 3.1
COT-SC (Wang et al., 2023b)
64.4 ± 0.8
28.2 ± 3.1
65.9 ± 3.2
30.5 ± 3.2
Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2024)
59.2 ± 0.9
27.5 ± 3.1
63.5 ± 3.4
31.6 ± 3.2
LLM Debate (Du et al., 2023)
60.6 ± 0.9
39.0 ± 3.4
65.6 ± 3.3
31.4 ± 3.2
Step-back Abstraction (Zheng et al., 2023)
60.4 ± 1.0
31.1 ± 3.2
65.1 ± 3.3
26.9 ± 3.0
Quality-Diversity (Lu et al., 2024c)
61.8 ± 0.9
23.8 ± 3.0
65.1 ± 3.3
30.2 ± 3.1
Role Assignment (Xu et al., 2023)
65.8 ± 0.9
30.1 ± 3.2
64.5 ± 3.3
31.1 ± 3.1
Automated Design of Agentic Systems on Different Domains
Prompt Optimization (Yang et al., 2024)
69.1 ± 0.9
30.6 ± 3.2
67.6 ± 3.2
32.9 ± 3.2
Meta Agent Search (Ours)
79.4 ± 0.8
53.4 ± 3.5
69.6 ± 3.2
34.6 ± 3.2
Results and Analysis.
The results across multiple domains demonstrate that Meta Agent Search
can discover agents that outperform state-of-the-art hand-designed agents (Table 1). We want to
highlight the substantial gap between the learned agents and hand-designed agents in the Reading
Comprehension and Math domains, with improvements in F1 scores by 13.6/100 and accuracy rates
by 14.4%, respectively. While Meta Agent Search also outperforms baselines in the Multi-task and
Science domains, the gap is smaller. We hypothesize that for challenging questions in the Science
and Multi-task domains, the knowledge in FMs is not sufficient to solve the questions, limiting the
improvement through optimizing agentic systems, which is a problem that will diminish as FMs
improve. In contrast, in the Reading Comprehension and Math domains, FMs possess adequate
knowledge to solve the questions, and errors could mainly be hallucinations or calculation mistakes,
which can be mitigated through well-designed agentic systems, like the ones discovered by Meta
Agent Search. Additionally, when compared to prompt optimization methods, the results demon-
strate that our proposed Meta Agent Search consistently outperforms them across all domains. This
comparison further strengthens our argument that defining agents in code and enabling the learning
of all components offer significant advantages. Overall, the results across various domains showcase
the effectiveness of Meta Agent Search in searching for agents tailored to specific domains. This
could be increasingly useful for saving human efforts and developing better task-specific agents as
we continue to create agents for a diverse set of applications (Wang et al., 2024).
4.3
GENERALIZATION AND TRANSFERABILITY
In the previous sections, we illustrated that Meta Agent Search can find effective agents for in-
dividual tasks. In this section, we further demonstrate the transferability and generalizability of
the discovered agents. To demonstrate the generalizability of the invented building blocks and de-
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
sign patterns, we transfer discovered agents from the MGSM (Math) domain to both math and
non-math domains to test their ability to generalize across different tasks. We evaluate the top 3
agents from MGSM by transferring them to (1) popular math domains: GSM8K (Cobbe et al.,
2021), GSM-Hard (Gao et al., 2023), and (2) non-math domains: MMLU (Multi-task) and DROP
(Reading Comprehension), as detailed in Section 4.2. As shown in Table 2, Meta Agent Search con-
sistently outperforms the baselines. Notably, our agents improve accuracy by 25.9% on GSM8K
and 13.2% on GSM-Hard compared to the baselines when transferring within math domains. More
surprisingly, we find that agents discovered in the math domain can also be transferred to non-math
domains. While their performance does not fully match agents specifically designed for the target
domains, they still outperform state-of-the-art hand-designed baselines. More results of transfers
across domains are shown in Appendix A.
We also observe similar superiority when transferring agents across different FMs on ARC. We
test the top 3 agents with the best test accuracy evaluated with GPT-3.5 on ARC and then transfer
them to Claude-Haiku (Anthropic, 2024a), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024), and Claude-Sonnet (Anthropic,
2024b). As shown in Table 3, we observe that the searched agents consistently outperform the hand-
designed agents, with a substantial gap. Notably, we found that Claude-Sonnet, the most powerful
model from Anthropic, performs the best among all tested models, enabling our best agent to achieve
nearly 50% accuracy on ARC. These results on transferring across domains and models highlight
Meta Agent Search ’s ability to discover generalizable design patterns and agentic systems.
Table 2: Performance on held-out math and non-math domains when transferring top agents
from MGSM (Math). GSM8K and GSM-Hard are the held-out math domains, while MMLU is for
Multi-task, and DROP is for Reading Comprehension. Agents discovered by Meta Agent Search
consistently outperform the baselines across all domains. We report the test accuracy and the 95%
bootstrap confidence interval. The names of the top agents are generated by Meta Agent Search.
Agent Name
Accuracy (%)
F1 Score
MGSM
GSM8K
GSM-Hard
MMLU
DROP
Manually Designed Agents
Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022)
28.0 ± 3.1
34.9 ± 3.2
15.0 ± 2.5
65.4 ± 3.3
64.2 ± 0.9
COT-SC (Wang et al., 2023b)
28.2 ± 3.1
37.8 ± 3.4
15.5 ± 2.5
65.9 ± 3.2
64.4 ± 0.8
Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2024)
27.5 ± 3.1
38.9 ± 3.4
15.1 ± 2.4
63.5 ± 3.4
59.2 ± 0.9
LLM Debate (Du et al., 2023)
39.0 ± 3.4
43.6 ± 3.4
17.4 ± 2.6
65.6 ± 3.3
60.6 ± 0.9
Step-back Abstraction (Zheng et al., 2023)
31.1 ± 3.2
31.5 ± 3.3
12.2 ± 2.3
65.1 ± 3.3
60.4 ± 1.0
Quality-Diversity (Lu et al., 2024c)
23.8 ± 3.0
28.0 ± 3.1
14.1 ± 2.4
65.1 ± 3.1
61.8 ± 0.9
Role Assignment (Xu et al., 2023)
30.1 ± 3.2
37.0 ± 3.4
18.0 ± 2.7
64.5 ± 3.3
65.8 ± 0.9
Top Agents Searched on MGSM (Math)
Transferred within
Math Domains
Transferred beyond
Math Domains
Dynamic Role-Playing Architecture
53.4 ± 3.5
69.5 ± 3.2
31.2 ± 3.2
62.4 ± 3.4
70.4 ± 0.9
Structured Multimodal Feedback Loop
50.2 ± 3.5
64.5 ± 3.4
30.1 ± 3.2
67.0 ± 3.2
70.4 ± 0.9
Interactive Multimodal Feedback Loop
47.4 ± 3.5
64.9 ± 3.3
27.6 ± 3.2
64.8 ± 3.3
71.9 ± 0.8
5
RELATED WORK
Agentic Systems.
Researchers develop various building blocks and design patterns for different
applications. Important building blocks for agentic systems include: prompting techniques (Chen
et al., 2023a; Schulhoff et al., 2024), chain-of-thought-based planning and reasoning methods (Wei
et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Hu & Clune, 2024), reflection (Madaan et al., 2024; Shinn et al.,
2023), developing new skills for embodied agents in code (Wang et al., 2023a; Vemprala et al.,
2023), external memory and RAG (Zhang et al., 2024c; Lewis et al., 2020), tool use (Qu et al., 2024;
Schick et al., 2023; Nakano et al., 2021), assigning FM modules in the agentic system with different
roles and enabling them to collaborate (Hong et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2024), and enabling the agent to instruct itself for the next action (Richards,
2023), etc. While the community has invested substantial effort in developing all the above important
techniques, this is only a partial list of the discovered building blocks, and many more remain to be
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Table 3: Performance on ARC when transferring top agents from GPT-3.5 to other FMs.
Agents discovered by Meta Agent Search consistently outperform the baselines across different
models. We report the test accuracy and the 95% bootstrap confidence interval. The names of top
agents are generated by Meta Agent Search. †We manually changed this name because the original
generated name was confusing.
Agent Name
Accuracy on ARC (%)
GPT-3.5
Claude-Haiku
GPT-4
Claude-Sonnet
Manually Designed Agents
Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022)
6.0 ± 2.7
4.3 ± 2.2
17.7 ± 4.4
25.3 ± 5.0
COT-SC (Wang et al., 2023b)
8.0 ± 3.2
5.3 ± 2.5
19.7 ± 4.5
26.3 ± 4.9
LLM Debate (Du et al., 2023)
4.0 ± 2.2
1.7 ± 1.5
19.0 ± 4.5
24.7 ± 4.8
Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2024)
6.7 ± 2.7
6.3 ± 2.8
23.0 ± 5.2
39.3 ± 5.5
Quality-Diversity (Lu et al., 2024c)
7.0 ± 2.9
3.3 ± 2.2
23.0 ± 4.7
31.7 ± 5.3
Top Agents Searched with GPT-3.5
Transferred to Other FMs
Structured Feedback and Ensemble Agent
13.7 ± 3.9
5.0 ± 2.5
30.0 ± 5.2
38.7 ± 5.5
Hierarchical Committee Reinforcement Agent
13.3 ± 3.8
8.3 ± 3.2
32.3 ± 8.9
39.7 ± 5.5
Dynamic Memory and Refinement Agent†
12.7 ± 3.9
9.7 ± 3.3
37.0 ± 5.3
48.3 ± 5.7
uncovered. Therefore, in this paper, we describe a newly forming research area, ADAS, which aims
to invent novel building blocks and design powerful agentic systems in an automated manner.
AI-Generating Algorithms and AutoML.
Research in AI-Generating Algorithms (AI-
GAs, Clune (2019)) and AutoML (Hutter et al., 2019) aims to replace handcrafted components in AI
systems by learning them. This field has three key pillars: (1) meta-learning architectures, (2) meta-
learning learning algorithms, and (3) generating learning environments and training data (Clune,
2019). Neural Architecture Search (Elsken et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2021) exem-
plifies the first pillar by automating neural network design, while works like MAML (Finn et al.,
2017) and Meta-RL (Wang et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2017; Norman & Clune, 2023; Zintgraf et al.,
2021a;b) exemplify the second pillar, focusing on “learning to learn” for improved sample efficiency
and generalizability. The third pillar includes works like POET (Wang et al., 2019; Dharna et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2020) and OMNI-EPIC (Faldor et al., 2024), which generate learning environ-
ments in an open-ended manner. We position Automated Design of Agentic Systems in both the
first and second pillars: meta-learning agentic architectures and leveraging in-context learning to
“learn to learn,” as shown in the ARC challenge (Section 4.1). Furthermore, recent AI-GA and
AutoML advances have also integrated Foundation Models (FMs) to write code, as seen in Fun-
Search (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024) and EoH (Liu et al., 2024), where FMs discover optimization
algorithms. In DiscoPOP (Lu et al., 2024a), FMs program loss functions for preference learning, and
Eureka (Ma et al., 2023) and language-to-reward (Yu et al., 2023) enable FMs to write reward func-
tions for reinforcement learning. OMNI-EPIC (Faldor et al., 2024) allows FMs to create robotics
learning environments. Similarly, we enable FMs to program new agents in code.
Existing Attempts to ADAS. There are two categories of works that attempt ADAS: those focused
on learning better prompts and those that learn more components beyond prompts. Most works fall
into the first category, where FMs are used to automate prompt engineering, primarily enhancing
the phrasing of instructions to improve reasoning (Yang et al., 2024; Fernando et al., 2024; Zhou
et al., 2024a; Yuksekgonul et al., 2024). However, these prompts are often domain-specific and dif-
ficult to generalize. Some works optimize role definitions within prompts (Yuan et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2023c;b; Wu et al., 2023), as assigning personas or roles to agents has been shown to be
beneficial (Xu et al., 2023). Although tuning prompts can improve performance, other components
remain fixed, limiting the space of agents that can be discovered. The second category, which is
less explored, involves learning additional components such as workflows, often representing agents
as networks or graphs. In these formulations, the FM with a certain prompt is considered a trans-
formation function for text on nodes, and the information flow of the text is considered as edges.
For example, DyLAN (Liu et al., 2023) uses FMs to optimize connections between nodes in a net-
work, DSPy (Khattab et al., 2024) and Trace (Cheng et al., 2024) optimizes across the Cartesian
product of a set of possible nodes, and GPT-Swarm (Zhuge et al., 2024) uses reinforcement learning
to optimize node connections. Although these approaches optimize workflows, many components
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
like tool usage remain fixed. AgentOptimizer (Zhang et al., 2024b) learns the tools used in agents,
AutoFlow (Li et al., 2024) proposes a new language to optimize workflow, Agent Symbolic Learn-
ing (Zhou et al., 2024b) attempts to learn prompts, tools, and workflows together. While these works
share similar motivations to learn more components in agents, they either fail to cover all possible
designs in agentic systems or have harder search spaces for search algorithms. In contrast, our work
represents all components in code, allowing all possible designs in agentic systems and resulting in
a promising search space for FM-guided search, as coding tasks are one of the most important tasks
in FMs’ training.
6
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Safety Considerations. While it is highly unlikely that model-generated code will perform overtly
malicious actions in our current settings with the Foundation Models (FMs) we employ, such code
could still act destructively due to limitations in model capability or alignment (Rokon et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021). To address these risks, we have implemented safety measures including con-
tainerized execution of all generated code in secure, isolated environments, thorough manual in-
spections to verify the absence of harmful behaviors, and clear warnings in our codebase to alert
users to potential risks. These practices align with established safety standards in the literature, such
as those in SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) and Voyager (Wang et al., 2023a), which similarly
prioritize controlled execution environments.
The proposed Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS) introduces a novel area in AI-GA
research, potentially accelerating the development of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) beyond
current manual approaches (Clune, 2019). This raises broader questions about advancing AI ca-
pabilities, a topic extensively debated in prior works (Clune, 2019; Ecoffet et al., 2020; Bostrom,
2002; Yudkowsky et al., 2008; Bengio et al., 2024), though beyond this paper’s scope. We argue
that publishing this work is net beneficial. It reveals that powerful ADAS algorithms can be easily
programmed using API access to FMs, without requiring expensive hardware like GPUs, inform-
ing the community of their accessibility and implications. Moreover, ADAS can enhance safety in
agentic systems by automating the design of explicit, interpretable workflows, reducing the risk of
malicious behavior through greater controllability and auditability.
We believe the discussion on ADAS and its safety impact is timely given the growing adoption of
agentic systems in real-world applications (Turow, 2024), where ADAS can streamline the creation
of safe, reliable agents, amplifying AI’s potential to benefit humanity in domains like health and
economics (Amodei, 2024). Furthermore, as self-improving AI systems become prominent (Clune,
2019; Fernando et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024a; Zelikman et al., 2022), their continued development
appears inevitable. By sharing this work, we aim to inspire further research into safe-ADAS algo-
rithms—potentially incorporating mechanisms like Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022)—to ensure
that advancements in AI-GA and self-improving AI yield systems that are both powerful and aligned
with human values, ultimately fostering safer AI development.
Future Work.
Our work also opens up many future research directions:
• Higher-order ADAS. Since the meta agent used in ADAS to program new agents in code is
also an agent, ADAS can become self-referential where the meta agent can be improved through
ADAS as well. It would be an exciting direction to have a higher order of meta-learning to allow
the learning of the meta agent and even the meta-meta agent, etc. (Lu et al., 2023; Schmidhuber,
1987; 2003; Zelikman et al., 2024)
• Online Continual Learning. As agents are deployed, they will receive vast amounts of feedback
from both task environments and users. Continuously improving agents based on this extensive
feedback is challenging for human developers. However, with ADAS automating the design and
enhancement of agents, online continual learning becomes feasible post-deployment.
• Multi-objective ADAS. We only consider one objective (i.e., performance) to optimize in this
paper, but in practice, multiple objectives are often considered, such as cost, latency, and robust-
ness of agentic systems (Hu et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2023). Thus, integrating multi-objective
search algorithms (Deb et al., 2002) in ADAS could be promising.
• Towards a Better Understanding of FMs.
Works from Neural Architecture Search (Huang
et al., 2023) show that by observing the emerged architecture, we could gain more insights into
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Neural Networks. In this paper, we also gained insights about FMs from the results. For exam-
ple, the best agent with GPT-3.5 involves a complex feedback mechanism, but when we transfer
to other advanced models, the agent with a simpler feedback mechanism but more refinement
becomes a better agent (Section 4.3). This shows that GPT-3.5 may have a worse capability in
evaluating and refining the answers, so it needs a complex feedback mechanism for better refine-
ment, while other advanced models benefit more from a simpler feedback mechanism.
• More complex domains.
Currently, we only evaluate Meta Agent Search on single-step QA
tasks in this paper. It would be interesting to extend the method to more complex domains, such
as real-world applications involving multi-step interaction with complex environments.
• Seeding ADAS with more existing building blocks. Although we can theoretically allow any
components in agentic systems to be programmed from scratch in the code space, it is not efficient
in practice. Therefore, it would be interesting to explore ADAS by standing on the shoulders of
existing human efforts, such as search engine tools, RAG (Lewis et al., 2020), or functions from
existing agent frameworks like LangChain (LangChainAI, 2022). Additionally, it is interesting
to support multi-modal capabilities (e.g. vision) in FMs or allow different FMs to be available in
agentic systems. This will enable the meta agent to choose from different FMs flexibly according
to the difficulty of the instruction and whether data privacy is a priority.
• Novelty search algorithms. In Meta Agent Search, the design of the search algorithm is rela-
tively simple, focusing solely on exploring interesting new designs. A more careful design of the
search algorithm can be a promising future direction. For example, one could incorporate more
sophisticated ideas from Quality-Diversity (Mouret & Clune, 2015; Cully & Demiris, 2017), AI-
generating (Clune, 2019), and Open-ended Algorithms (Faldor et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a;
Stanley & Lehman, 2015; Stanley et al., 2019). One could also include more classic approaches
to balance exploration and exploitation (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Liu et al., 2024).
• More Intelligent Evaluation Functions.
In this work, we simply evaluate discovered agents
on the evaluation set and use the numerical performance results. However, this approach is both
expensive and misses a lot of information. A promising future direction is to enable the meta
agent to analyze detailed running logs during the evaluation, which contain rich information on
the failure and success modes for better debugging and improving agentic systems (Zhou et al.,
2024b). Also, many tasks involve subjective answer evaluations (Chiang et al., 2024; Lu et al.,
2024b) that do not have ground-truth answers. It is also important to design novel evaluation
functions in ADAS to address these tasks. Finally, in this work, we targeted only one domain
during the search. It would be interesting to explore whether ADAS algorithms can design even
better generalist agents when specifically searching for agents capable of performing well across
multiple domains.
• Understanding the emergence of complexity from human organizations. Beyond potentially
saving researchers’ efforts and improving upon the manual design of agentic systems, the research
in ADAS is also scientifically intriguing as it sheds light on the origins of complexity emerging
from human organization and society. The agentic system is a machine learning system that oper-
ates primarily over natural language—a representation that is interpretable to humans and used by
humans in constructing our organization and society. Thus, there is a close connection between
agentic systems and human organizations, as shown in works incorporating the organizational
structure for human companies in agents (Hong et al., 2023) or simulating a human town with
agents (Park et al., 2023). Therefore, the study in ADAS may enable us to observe how to create
a simple set of conditions and have an algorithm to bootstrap itself from simplicity to produce
complexity in a system akin to human society.
Conclusion.
In this paper, we propose a new research problem, Automated Design of Agentic
Systems (ADAS), which aims to automatically invent novel building blocks and design powerful
agentic systems. We demonstrated that a promising approach to ADAS is to define agents in code,
allowing new agents to be automatically discovered by a “meta” agent programming them in code.
Following this idea, we propose Meta Agent Search, where the meta agent iteratively builds on
previous discoveries to program interesting new agents. The experiments show that Meta Agent
Search consistently outperforms state-of-the-art hand-designed agents across an extensive number
of domains, and the discovered agents transfer well across models and domains. Overall, our work
illustrates the potential of an exciting new research direction toward full automation in developing
powerful agentic systems from the bottom up.
11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Vector Institute, the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs program, grants
from Schmidt Futures and Open Philanthropy, an NSERC Discovery Grant, and a generous donation
from Rafael Cosman. We thank Jenny Zhang, Rach Pradhan, Ruiyu Gou, Nicholas Ioannidis, and
Eunjeong Hwang for insightful discussions and feedback.
REFERENCES
Dario Amodei. Machines of loving grace, October 2024. URL https://darioamodei.com/
machines-of-loving-grace.
Anthropic.
Introducing the next generation of claude.
https://www.anthropic.com/
news/claude-3-family, March 2024a. Blog post.
Anthropic.
Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-3-5-sonnet, June 2024b. Blog post.
Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones,
Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harm-
lessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, Andrew Yao, Dawn Song, Pieter Abbeel, Trevor Darrell, Yu-
val Noah Harari, Ya-Qin Zhang, Lan Xue, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, et al. Managing extreme ai risks
amid rapid progress. Science, 384(6698):842–845, 2024.
N Bostrom. Existential Risks: analyzing human extinction scenarios and related hazards. Journal
of Evolution and Technology, 9, 2002.
Robert S Boyer and J Strother Moore. A mechanical proof of the Turing completeness of pure LISP.
Citeseer, 1983.
Harrison
Chase.
What
is
an
agent?
https://blog.langchain.dev/
what-is-an-agent/, June 2024. Blog post.
Banghao Chen, Zhaofeng Zhang, Nicolas Langren´e, and Shengxin Zhu. Unleashing the poten-
tial of prompt engineering in large language models: a comprehensive review. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.14735, 2023a.
Guangyao Chen, Siwei Dong, Yu Shu, Ge Zhang, Sesay Jaward, Karlsson B¨orje, Jie Fu, and Yemin
Shi. Autoagents: The automatic agents generation framework. arXiv preprint, 2023b.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu,
Yaxi Lu, Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and
exploring emergent behaviors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2023c.
Ching-An Cheng, Allen Nie, and Adith Swaminathan. Trace is the next autodiff: Generative op-
timization with rich feedback, execution traces, and llms. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 37:71596–71642, 2024.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Tianle Li,
Dacheng Li, Hao Zhang, Banghua Zhu, Michael Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference, 2024.
Franc¸ois Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.
Jeff Clune. Ai-gas: Ai-generating algorithms, an alternate paradigm for producing general artificial
intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10985, 2019.
12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to
solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. Quality and diversity optimization: A unifying modular frame-
work. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 22(2):245–259, 2017.
N. Dalal and B. Triggs. Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. In 2005 IEEE Com-
puter Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05), volume 1, pp.
886–893 vol. 1, 2005. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2005.177.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Amrit Pratap, Sameer Agarwal, and TAMT Meyarivan. A fast and elitist mul-
tiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 6(2):
182–197, 2002.
Aaron Dharna, Amy K Hoover, Julian Togelius, and Lisa B Soros. Transfer dynamics in emergent
evolutionary curricula. IEEE Transactions on Games, 15(2):157–170, 2022.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch.
Improv-
ing factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14325, 2023.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner.
DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In
Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 2368–2378, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1246.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L. Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. RLˆ2: Fast
reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017.
Adrien Ecoffet, Jeff Clune, and Joel Lehman.
Open questions in creating safe open-ended AI:
Tensions between control and creativity. In Conference on Artificial Life, pp. 27–35. MIT Press,
2020.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter.
Neural architecture search: A survey.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(55):1–21, 2019.
Maxence Faldor, Jenny Zhang, Antoine Cully, and Jeff Clune. Omni-epic: Open-endedness via mod-
els of human notions of interestingness with environments programmed in code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.15568, 2024.
Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Sunil Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim
Rockt¨aschel. Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution, 2024.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023.
Ryan Greenblatt.
Getting 50% sota on arc-agi with gpt-4.
https://redwoodresearch.
substack.com/p/getting-50-sota-on-arc-agi-with-gpt, July 2024. Techni-
cal Report.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2021.
13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang,
Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-
agent collaborative framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.
Shengran Hu and Jeff Clune. Thought Cloning: Learning to think while acting by imitating human
thinking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Shengran Hu, Ran Cheng, Cheng He, Zhichao Lu, Jing Wang, and Miao Zhang. Accelerating multi-
objective neural architecture search by random-weight evaluation. Complex & Intelligent Systems,
pp. 1–10, 2021.
Shihua Huang, Zhichao Lu, Kalyanmoy Deb, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. Revisiting residual net-
works for adversarial robustness. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8202–8211, 2023.
Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated machine learning: methods, sys-
tems, challenges. Springer Nature, 2019.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Saiful
Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, et al. Dspy: Compil-
ing declarative language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25, 2012.
Abrahim Ladha. Lecture 11: Turing-completeness. https://faculty.cc.gatech.edu/
˜ladha/S24/4510/L11.pdf, 2024. CS 4510 Automata and Complexity, February 21st,
2024, Scribed by Rishabh Singhal.
LangChainAI.
Langchain: Build context-aware reasoning applications.
https://github.
com/langchain-ai/langchain, 2022.
Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for
novelty alone. Evolutionary computation, 19(2):189–223, 2011.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich K¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt¨aschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented genera-
tion for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
9459–9474, 2020.
Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu, Kai Mei, Wenyue Hua, Balaji Rama, Om Raheja, Hao Wang, He Zhu, and
Yongfeng Zhang. Autoflow: Automated workflow generation for large language model agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12821, 2024.
Fei Liu, Tong Xialiang, Mingxuan Yuan, Xi Lin, Fu Luo, Zhenkun Wang, Zhichao Lu, and Qingfu
Zhang. Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language
model. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Zijun Liu, Yanzhe Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Diyi Yang. Dynamic llm-agent network: An llm-
agent collaboration framework with agent team optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02170,
2023.
Chris Lu, Sebastian Towers, and Jakob Foerster.
Arbitrary order meta-learning with simple
population-based evolution. In ALIFE 2023: Ghost in the Machine: Proceedings of the 2023
Artificial Life Conference. MIT Press, 2023.
14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Chris Lu, Samuel Holt, Claudio Fanconi, Alex J Chan, Jakob Foerster, Mihaela van der Schaar, and
Robert Tjarko Lange. Discovering preference optimization algorithms with and for large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08414, 2024a.
Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The AI Scien-
tist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292,
2024b.
Cong Lu, Shengran Hu, and Jeff Clune. Intelligent go-explore: Standing on the shoulders of giant
foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15143, 2024c.
Zhichao Lu, Ian Whalen, Vishnu Boddeti, Yashesh Dhebar, Kalyanmoy Deb, Erik Goodman, and
Wolfgang Banzhaf. Nsga-net: neural architecture search using multi-objective genetic algorithm.
In Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference, pp. 419–427, 2019.
Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayara-
man, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via
coding large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2023.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Elliot Meyerson, Mark J Nelson, Herbie Bradley, Adam Gaier, Arash Moradi, Amy K Hoover, and
Joel Lehman. Language model crossover: Variation through few-shot prompting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.12170, 2023.
Shen-yun Miao, Chao-Chun Liang, and Keh-Yih Su. A diverse corpus for evaluating and developing
english math word problem solvers. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 975–984, 2020.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.04909, 2015.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Andrew Ng. Issue 253. https://www.deeplearning.ai/the-batch/issue-253/,
June 2024. Newsletter issue.
Ben Norman and Jeff Clune. First-explore, then exploit: Meta-learning intelligent exploration. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.02276, 2023.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/index/chatgpt/, November 2022.
Blog post.
OpenAI. Simple evals, 2023. URL https://github.com/openai/simple-evals. Ac-
cessed: 2024-08-10.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings
of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Arkil Patel, Satwik Bhattamishra, and Navin Goyal. Are NLP models really able to solve simple
math word problems? In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2080–
2094, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
naacl-main.168.
15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu,
and Maosong Sun.
Communicative agents for software development.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.07924, 2023.
Chen Qian, Zihao Xie, Yifei Wang, Wei Liu, Yufan Dang, Zhuoyun Du, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang,
Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Scaling large-language-model-based multi-agent collaboration.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07155, 2024.
Changle Qu, Sunhao Dai, Xiaochi Wei, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Jun Xu,
and Ji-Rong Wen.
Tool learning with large language models: A survey.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.17935, 2024.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea
Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien
Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman.
Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a
benchmark, 2023.
Toran Bruce Richards.
Autogpt.
https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/
AutoGPT, 2023. GitHub repository.
Tim Rockt¨aschel. Artificial Intelligence: 10 Things You Should Know. Seven Dials, September
2024. ISBN 978-1399626521.
Md Omar Faruk Rokon, Risul Islam, Ahmad Darki, Evangelos E Papalexakis, and Michalis Falout-
sos. SourceFinder: Finding malware Source-Code from publicly available repositories in GitHub.
In 23rd International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses (RAID 2020),
pp. 149–163, 2020.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog,
M Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang,
Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models.
Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
teach themselves to use tools. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Yacmpz84TH.
Jurgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning. on learning now to learn:
The meta-meta-meta...-hook. Diploma thesis, Technische Universitat Munchen, Germany, 14
May 1987. URL http://www.idsia.ch/˜juergen/diploma.html.
J¨urgen Schmidhuber. G¨odel machines: self-referential universal problem solvers making provably
optimal self-improvements. arXiv preprint cs/0309048, 2003.
Sander Schulhoff, Michael Ilie, Nishant Balepur, Konstantine Kahadze, Amanda Liu, Chenglei Si,
Yinheng Li, Aayush Gupta, HyoJung Han, Sevien Schulhoff, et al. The prompt report: A system-
atic survey of prompting techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06608, 2024.
Xuan Shen, Yaohua Wang, Ming Lin, Yilun Huang, Hao Tang, Xiuyu Sun, and Yanzhi Wang. Deep-
mad: Mathematical architecture design for deep convolutional neural network. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6163–6173, 2023.
Freda Shi, Mirac Suzgun, Markus Freitag, Xuezhi Wang, Suraj Srivats, Soroush Vosoughi,
Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Sebastian Ruder, Denny Zhou, Dipanjan Das, and Jason Wei. Lan-
guage models are multilingual chain-of-thought reasoners. In The Eleventh International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36, 2023.
16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Kenneth O Stanley and Joel Lehman. Why greatness cannot be planned: The myth of the objective.
Springer, 2015.
Kenneth O Stanley, Jeff Clune, Joel Lehman, and Risto Miikkulainen. Designing neural networks
through neuroevolution. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(1):24–35, 2019.
Richard S. Sutton. The bitter lesson, 2019. URL http://www.incompleteideas.net/
IncIdeas/BitterLesson.html.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Jon Turow. The rise of ai agent infrastructure. June 2024. URL https://www.madrona.com/
the-rise-of-ai-agent-infrastructure/.
Sai Vemprala, Rogerio Bonatti, Arthur Bucker, and Ashish Kapoor.
Chatgpt for robotics: De-
sign principles and model abilities.
Technical Report MSR-TR-2023-8, Microsoft, Febru-
ary 2023. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
chatgpt-for-robotics-design-principles-and-model-abilities/.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2305.16291, 2023a.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick.
Learning to reinforcement learn.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):186345, 2024.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Poet: open-ended coevolution of
environments and their optimized solutions. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference, GECCO ’19, pp. 142–151, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450361118. doi: 10.1145/3321707.3321799.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Aditya Rawal, Jiale Zhi, Yulun Li, Jeffrey Clune, and Kenneth Stanley.
Enhanced poet: Open-ended reinforcement learning through unbounded invention of learning
challenges and their solutions. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9940–9951.
PMLR, 2020.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li,
Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-
agent conversation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023.
Benfeng Xu, An Yang, Junyang Lin, Quan Wang, Chang Zhou, Yongdong Zhang, and Zhendong
Mao. Expertprompting: Instructing large language models to be distinguished experts. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.14688, 2023.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bb4VGOWELI.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=WE_vluYUL-X.
17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montserrat Gonzalez
Arenas, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language
to rewards for robotic skill synthesis. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 374–404. PMLR,
2023.
Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, and Deqing Yang.
Evoa-
gent: Towards automatic multi-agent generation via evolutionary algorithms.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.14228, 2024.
Eliezer Yudkowsky et al. Artificial Intelligence as a positive and negative factor in global risk.
Global catastrophic risks, 1(303):184, 2008.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and
James Zou. Textgrad: Automatic” differentiation” via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496,
2024.
Matei Zaharia, Omar Khattab, Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Heather Miller, Chris Potts,
James Zou, Michael Carbin, Jonathan Frankle, Naveen Rao, and Ali Ghodsi. The shift from
models to compound ai systems. https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2024/02/18/
compound-ai-systems/, 2024.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. STar: Bootstrapping reasoning with
reasoning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=_3ELRdg2sgI.
Eric Zelikman, Eliana Lorch, Lester Mackey, and Adam Tauman Kalai. Self-taught optimizer (stop):
Recursively self-improving code generation. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
Jenny Zhang, Joel Lehman, Kenneth Stanley, and Jeff Clune. OMNI: Open-endedness via mod-
els of human notions of interestingness. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AgM3MzT99c.
Shaokun Zhang, Jieyu Zhang, Jiale Liu, Linxin Song, Chi Wang, Ranjay Krishna, and Qingyun
Wu. Offline training of language model agents with functions as learnable weights. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024b.
Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong,
and Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model based agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13501, 2024c.
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H Chi, Quoc V Le,
and Denny Zhou. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06117, 2023.
Pei Zhou, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Denny
Zhou, Swaroop Mishra, and Huaixiu Steven Zheng. Self-discover: Large language models self-
compose reasoning structures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03620, 2024a.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yixin Ou, Shengwei Ding, Long Li, Jialong Wu, Tiannan Wang, Jiamin Chen,
Shuai Wang, Xiaohua Xu, Ningyu Zhang, et al. Symbolic learning enables self-evolving agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18532, 2024b.
Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and J¨urgen
Schmidhuber. Gptswarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. In Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Luisa Zintgraf, Sebastian Schulze, Cong Lu, Leo Feng, Maximilian Igl, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Yarin
Gal, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Varibad: Variational bayes-adaptive deep rl via
meta-learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(289):1–39, 2021a.
Luisa M Zintgraf, Leo Feng, Cong Lu, Maximilian Igl, Kristian Hartikainen, Katja Hofmann, and
Shimon Whiteson. Exploration in approximate hyper-state space for meta reinforcement learning.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12991–13001. PMLR, 2021b.
18
