HADES: Hardware Accelerated Decoding for 
Efficient Speculation in Large Language Models 
 
Ze Yang1st & * , Yihong Jin2nd, Xinhe Xu3rd 
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 
Champaign, USA 
{zeyang2, yihongj3, xinhexu2}@illinois.edu 
 
Abstract: Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized 
natural language processing by understanding and generating 
human-like text. However, the increasing demand for more 
sophisticated LLMs presents significant computational challenges 
due to their scale and complexity. This paper introduces Hardware 
Accelerated Decoding (HADES), a novel approach to enhance the 
performance and energy efficiency of LLMs. We address the 
design of an LLM accelerator with hardware-level speculative 
decoding support, a concept not previously explored in existing 
literature. Our work demonstrates how speculative decoding can 
significantly improve the efficiency of LLM operations, paving the 
way for more advanced and practical applications of these models. 
Keywords: 
Large 
Language 
Model 
(LLM); 
Hardware 
Accelerators; FPGAs; GPU; Transformer; Energy Efficiency; 
Speculative Decoding 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Large language models (LLMs) have gained a lot of 
attraction in recent years, revolutionizing the way we interact 
with technology and process information. Their impact spans a 
wide range of applications, from natural language processing, 
content creation, and translation services to more complex tasks 
like programming assistance, data analysis, and even aiding in 
research and discovery across various fields. 
As the demand for LLMs increases, the need for a higher 
token generation rate also increases drastically. Agents driven 
by LLM use techniques such as Chain-Of-Thought [23, 24] to 
accomplish complex tasks autonomously. In these cases, the 
token generation rate directly affects the execution time of the 
autonomous agents.  
Building on this momentum, our work delves into the 
exploration and implementation of Hardware-Accelerated 
Speculative Decoding. This innovative approach aims to 
significantly elevate the token generation rate, addressing the 
growing demand for efficiency in LLM applications. By 
leveraging hardware acceleration, we seek to enhance the speed 
and responsiveness of LLM-driven agents, making complex 
tasks more feasible in real-time scenarios. Our initiative marks a 
pivotal step towards optimizing the performance of large 
language models, ensuring they can meet the needs of advanced 
applications and deliver results with unprecedented speed.   
This paper makes the following contributions:  
1. We devise a modular design that enables speculative 
decoding in hardware with simply an add-on to the original 
ASIC implementation. 
2. We demonstrated that by implementing speculative 
decoding pipelines in hardware, significant speedup and power 
efficiency improvements can be achieved. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
  With the rise of popularity of AI in language generation, 
Generative Pre-trained Transformers have seen an exponential 
growth in their size, or weights. As the size for autoregressive 
models [17, 19, 20, 25] increases, so do their capabilities as 
demonstrated by models such as LLaMa [15, 18] and GPT-3 
[1]. However, with the increase in size, comes at a cost of 
inference time. Since a standard inference pass requires all 
weights in the model to be used at least once, leading to most 
large models being memory bottlenecked [15]. Moreover, each 
decoding step is dependent on the previous step and therefore 
must be done sequentially. This leads to inefficiency on GPUs, 
which are optimized for parallel workload, that often see 
utilization in the single-digits. 
  Increasing batch size allows the model to process multiple 
input streams in parallel and allows for efficient utilization and 
throughput, with slightly worse latency. However, batching is 
only useful in a serving environment where multiple users are 
calling the GPT at the same time. Most of the GPT usage is at a 
personal level, where the batch size is 1. There have been 
various attempts to reduce the runtime for a single decoding 
step by either reducing the amount of computation for all 
workload, such as quantization [5], or ones that are observed to 
be easily generated, such as early-exit [14]. While these 
methods have proven successful in reducing the time for 
decoding steps, they either require modification to the model 
architecture or do not maintain the same probability distribution 
as the original model. Speculative decoding [7, 21, 26], on the 
other hand, does not require modification to the original 
architecture and guarantees the same probability distribution. 
Speculative decoding aims to dynamically reduce the workload 
for a large autoregressive model by utilizing a smaller 
autoregressive model for most of the decoding steps. This is 
under the observation that some decoding steps are much easier 
than others, and that the size of the model makes minimal 
impact on the probability distribution.  
  Speculative decoding aims to reduce the runtime for a given 
model, which we will refer to as the target model, by employing 

a smaller model using the same encoder and tokenizer, which 
we will refer to as the draft model. After tokenizing and 
encoding the input, the prompt tokens will be fed through a 
series of autoregressive runs as follows. The draft model will 
run γ times autoregressively, generating γ speculated tokens. 
The target model will then run once, verifying the speculated 
tokens and generating the γ+1th token in parallel. Each 
speculated token is then examined and accepted if the said token 
could be generated by the target model. If all speculated tokens 
are accepted, the speculated tokens as well as the γ+1th token 
will be appended to the prompt tokens for the next series of 
runs. Observe that the runtime reduction is achieved with lower 
compute and memory utilization. Consider the ideal case where 
all speculated tokens are accepted, the series of runs have 
effectively generated γ+1th tokens in γ * tdraft + ttarget, where the 
naive autoregressive runs on the target model only will take 
(γ+1) * ttarget. Since the draft model is smaller than the target 
model, then tdraft < ttarget. If there is a mispredict, the algorithm 
accepts all speculated tokens before the mispredicted one and 
restarts the series of runs. 
  Speculative decoding drew inspiration from speculative 
execution [2], where tasks are being performed speculatively in 
parallel to the verification for the necessity of said task. Branch 
prediction is a prominent example for speculative execution, 
where instructions are fetched and executed under the 
assumption that they are correct. Similarly, speculative 
decoding runs the smaller model speculatively under the 
assumption that the decoding steps are mostly model size 
agnostic.  
  Although the concept of speculative decoding has only 
existed for roughly a year, there have been numerous advances 
in the software area, from further optimization with the choice 
of draft models to the techniques using draft-less models. This 
proves the genuineness and the usefulness of the concept of 
speculative decoding. Due to the short time span since 
discovery and speculative decoding's origin as a software 
optimization technique, there has been minimal discourse in the 
hardware aspect. Therefore, we believe there exists an 
opportunity for hardware support of speculative decoding. As 
mentioned above, speculative decoding does not require 
architectural modification to the original model. We believe 
that our accelerator should adhere to that philosophy, where our 
accelerator does not require changes to the accelerator for the 
model itself, if one were to choose to integrate it. This 
significantly limits our design space as we need to consider 
consistency between different methods of integration, between 
hardware and software, as well as different hardware 
accelerators. 
III. 
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
  To explore the impact of hardware-accelerated speculative 
decoding, we initially conduct an in-depth analysis of serving 
OPT[11] and Llama[13] , the most widely utilized large 
language 
models, 
utilizing 
software-based 
speculative 
decoding. Subsequently, we compare these findings with those 
obtained through our approach of hardware-accelerated 
speculative decoding. 
  Setup. For software-based speculative decoding, we will 
implement in the Microsoft DeepSpeed library [12]. We use the 
same setup as SpecInfer [10], first using the draft model to 
generate draft tokens and then using the target model to verify 
the output of the draft model. We set the batch size to 1 and use 
greedy decoding. We perform both software-based or 
accelerated by hardware experiments on the OPT model and 
GPT-2 base models. For ASIC implementation of speculative 
decoding, we will use Synopsys VCS to compile HLS code 
from PyTorch models. We will then add the proposed 
speculative decoding modules and simulate them with VCS. 
The synthesized power and token generation rate will be 
recorded. 
  Metrics. To evaluate the efficacy of various speculative 
decoding approaches in the context of a target model, we focus 
on two key metrics: throughput, defined as the number of tokens 
generated per second, and the Token Acceptance Rate (TAR). 
It's important to highlight that the main objective behind 
implementing 
speculative 
decoding strategies, whether 
software-based or accelerated by hardware, is to enhance the 
overall throughput. 
  Estimated output. In the anticipated outcomes of our 
comparative analysis, we project that hardware-accelerated 
speculative decoding will demonstrate a superior throughput 
relative to its software-based counterpart. This expectation is 
rooted in the inherent efficiency gains that hardware 
acceleration brings to computational tasks, allowing for more 
rapid data processing and token generation. Such improvements 
are critical in environments where the speed of inference plays 
a pivotal role in the overall performance and responsiveness of 
the system. Hence, we predict a notable enhancement in 
throughput 
metrics 
for 
hardware-accelerated 
methods, 
underscoring their potential to optimize speculative decoding 
processes significantly. 
  Challenges. Since implementing an end-to-end LLM 
accelerator is very complicated and unnecessarily complex, we 
decided to use custom logic to speed up only the verification 
part of speculative decoding. This way, our logic will be 
compatible with all existing LLM accelerators, and it will 
greatly speed up the development. We first try to use OpenHLS 
to lower Python to RTL using HLS techniques. However, due 
to the lack of maintenance in the codebase, we cannot 
successfully translate it. Next, we wrote a C implementation 
and then used AMD Vivado to lower C into RTL. It does the 
translation, but the testbench suggests that the performance is 
very poor. Then we looked at the HLS RTL carefully and 
optimized its performance by writing our own Verilog code 
shown in figure 1.  
This results in significant speedup compared to the GPU 
baselines, see section 5 for more discussion. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS 
  We initially planned to utilize tools like OpenHLS [8] and 
scalehls [4] to convert a PyTorch model into an RTL flow, 
initializing draft and target models for speculative decoding on 
FPGA. PyTorch Labs introduced gpt-fast [6], an efficient, 
PyTorch-native transformer optimization framework designed 
specifically for large language models. gpt-fast requires no 

dependencies other than PyTorch and SentencePiece and 
supports both INT8/INT4 quantization and speculative 
decoding, aligning perfectly with our objectives. Importantly, 
the LLaMA family is also supported by gpt-fast. Therefore, we 
commenced optimization of the Llama-2-7b-chat-hf and 
Llama-2-70b-chat-hf models using gpt-fast, addressing some 
PyTorch version compatibility issues in the process. We 
successfully completed the INT8 quantization and speculative 
decoding optimizations. 
However, we encountered two significant challenges. First, gpt-
fast uses a nightly version of PyTorch that incorporates many 
new features unsupported by our chosen RTL conversion tool. 
Second, the optimized models remain excessively large for 
effective FPGA simulation; for instance, the INT8 version of 
Llama-2-7b-chat-hf still requires 6.5GB, severely slowing our 
simulations. 
Due to these challenges and the limited timeframe, we decided 
to pivot from the LLaMA models to explore alternatives like 
GPT-2 and OPT. 
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE CHART 
Model Pair 
Scheme 
Token/sec 
Speedup 
GPT2 
Draft = 124M 
Target = 1554M 
γ = 0 
77 
1.0x 
γ = 2 
102 
1.32x 
γ = 4 
95 
1.23x 
γ = 8 
84 
1.09x 
γ = 16 
51 
0.66x 
OPT 
Draft = 125M 
Target = 6.7B 
γ = 0 
38 
1.0x 
γ = 2 
56 
1.47x 
γ = 4 
70 
1.84x 
γ = 8 
60 
1.58x 
γ = 16 
34 
0.89x 
We conducted experiments with both the GPT-2 and OPT 
model families. We selected these because of their widespread 
use and extensive support on platforms like Huggingface, 
which facilitates troubleshooting. These model families offer a 
broad spectrum of sizes, ranging from 100 million to 60 billion 
parameters. This variety provides us with greater flexibility in 
our hardware development efforts. 
 
 
Figure 1.  HADES architecture diagram. 
Utilizing Torch MLIR, we are able to lower PyTorch model into 
MLIR, however, we encountered significant challenges when 
lowering from MLIR to Verilog. Alternatively, we are actively 
exploring the probability of using ScaleHLS to lower MLIR to 
HLS C++, and then from HLS C++ to RTL using AMD Vitis 
software. We implemented Algorithm 1. From Chen et al. [3]. 
Algorithm 1 Speculative Decoding 
1. Given γ and final sequence length T 
2. Given draft model p, target model q and initial tokens x0, ..., 
xₜ 
3. n ← t 
4. While n < T do: 
5.      For t ∈ γ: 
6.          Decode draft model autoregressively: 
7.          x̃ₜ ∼ p(x | x₁, ..., xₙ, x̃₁, ..., x̃ₜ₋₁) 
8.      end for 
9.      Decode target model: 
10.    q(x | x₁, ..., xₙ), ..., q(x | x₁, ..., xₙ, x̃₁, ..., x̃ₜ) 
10.    For t ∈ γdo 
11. 
Sample r ∼ U[0, 1] (uniform distribution) 
12. 
If r < min(1, q(x | x₁, ..., xₙ₊ₜ₋₁) / p(x | x₁, ..., xₙ₊ₜ₋₁)): 
13. 
       xₙ₊ₜ ← x̃ₜ 
14. 
       n ← n + 1 
15. 
else: 
16. 
       Sample xₙ₊ₜ ∼ q(x | x₁, ..., xₙ₊ₜ₋₁) - p(x | x₁, ..., xₙ₊ₜ₋₁) 
17. 
       break 
18.         end if 
19.     end for 
20.     If all γ accepted: 
21. 
Sample xₙ₊ₜ₊₁ ∼ q(x | x₁, ..., xₙ₊ₜ) 
20. 
n ← n + 1 
22.     end if 
23. end while 
 
In the experiment, table 1, the baseline is the performance of the 
target model when running autoregressively. We then apply 
speculative decoding with varying gamma factors and observe 
how the performances changes. 
After applying speculative decoding to the target model with 
the help of a draft model, we were able to observe speedup 
compared to the baseline as expected. However, there were a 
few more notable observations. The speedup rate drops below 
the base line for certain cases, specifically ones with high 
gamma factors. Recalling that the idea of speculative decoding 
originated from hardware branch predictors, then a high gamma 
factor is analogous to a high latency until the branch is resolved. 
This leads to an increased penalty if the speculated tokens are 
incorrect. Intuitively, speculations based on mis-speculations 
are more likely to be incorrect. Furthermore, the optimal gamma 
between the two model pairs is different as the optimal gamma 
can only be determined at run-time. Wang et al. [17] have also 
observed the issue and developed a framework to determine 
optimal gamma factor at run time. For us, this means that our 
hardware accelerator needs to be flexible and can adapt to 
different gamma factors. 
A. Observation 
Marchisio et al. [9] observed that transformers are often 
memory-bound due to the amount of parameters that has to be 
passed through for each inference step. That is to say, relatively 
little memory communication occurs outside of inference steps. 

We observe that only the tokens and logits are accessed during 
the verification and rollback phase of speculative decoding. The 
size of the logits is directly proportional to the model's 
vocabulary size. Which is approximately 100KB for both GPT-
2 and OPT, which is (γ + 1) * 100KB in total. In hardware, we 
believe we can buffer the logits in an on-chip SRAM due to its 
relatively small size. Furthermore, verification stage can be 
easily pipelined due to its sequential nature. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
We evaluate the verification performance with A100, A6000, 
Intel i7-12700k, HLS implementation from C, and our 
optimized HADES implementation. We used GPT-2 (124M 
parameters) as the draft model, and GPT2-XL (1.5B parameters) 
as the target model. We measured the time it takes for the 
verification phase and the number of tokens it verifies to 
calculate verified tokens per second, which will serve as our 
quantification metrics. Figure 2 shows the verification 
performance across different computing devices. HADES 
achieves 6.99x and 7.74x better tokens/sec than A100 and 
A6000, respectively. We also observe that i7-12700k has 
similar performance compared to the GPUs. We speculate that 
it could be caused by the fact that verification is not 
computationally intensive but rather memory-bounded, 
incurring incurred kernel launch overhead. 
We also evaluated different devices' energy efficiencies. We 
used profiling tools to measure the real-time power 
consumption for A6000, A100, i7-12700k, and AMD Vivado 
tool to estimate the power consumption of C HLS and HADES. 
The verification tokens/sec/Watt are plotted in Figure 3. Again, 
HADES shows massive energy efficiency gain, achieving 
159.66x and 117.95x better tokens/sec/Watt than A6000, A100, 
respectively. 
 
Figure 2.  Verification tokens/sec for RTX-A6000, A100, Intel i7-12700k, 
HLS implementation from C, and our optimized HADES implementation. 
 
Figure 3.  Verification tokens/sec/Watt for RTX-A6000, A100, Intel i7-
12700k, HLS implementation from C, and our optimized HADES 
implementation. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Importance of Specialized Hardware: One of the most 
significant takeaways from our project is the tremendous impact 
that specialized hardware can have on the performance and 
energy efficiency of LLMs. By designing hardware specifically 
tailored for speculative decoding, we achieved substantial 
improvements over general-purpose GPUs. This underscores 
the potential benefits of continuing to explore and develop 
specialized hardware solutions for various computational tasks 
in natural language processing. 
Challenges of End-to-End Implementation: Implementing 
end-to-end speculative decoding at the hardware level 
presented unique challenges. Due to time limitation, we have to 
only focus on the verification phase first. However, it lowers 
the impact of our work, since verification phase only occupies 
about 2% to 10% of end-to-end speculative decoding. 
Energy Efficiency Considerations: Our work demonstrated 
significant energy efficiency gains, which are crucial for the 
sustainability of deploying large-scale models in real-world 
applications. This aspect of our project emphasized the 
necessity of considering energy consumption alongside 
performance metrics, particularly as the scale and complexity 
of LLMs continue to grow. 
Scalability Issues: As we benchmarked our accelerator with 
various models, it became clear that scalability is a critical 
factor. The ability to maintain performance gains across 
different model sizes and architectures is essential for the 
practical adoption of our approach.  This experience reinforced 
the importance of designing scalable solutions that can adapt to 
evolving model requirements. 
Interdisciplinary Collaboration: The project benefited greatly 
from the collaboration between hardware and software experts. 
This 
interdisciplinary 
approach 
facilitated 
a 
more 
comprehensive 
understanding 
of 
the 
challenges 
and 
opportunities 
in 
implementing 
hardware-accelerated 
speculative decoding. For instance, software experts identified 
specific parts of the LLM model, such as the verification stage, 
that could benefit from hardware parallelization. They worked 
closely with hardware experts to ensure these parts were clearly 

explained and aligned with hardware capabilities. Conversely, 
hardware experts provided insights into the unique features and 
limitations of the hardware, enabling software experts to adapt 
their algorithms accordingly. This iterative exchange not only 
optimized the system’s performance but also highlighted the 
value of cross-domain knowledge and the need for ongoing 
collaboration between different fields of expertise. 
Future Directions: Finally, our work has opened several 
avenues for future research, including benchmarking additional 
models, and leveraging insights from representative studies on 
FPGA-based LLM accelerators [22] to develop an end-to-end 
hardware accelerator tailored for speculative decoding. 
Additionally, we aim to explore multi-candidate speculative 
decoding verification. 
These directions promise to further enhance the performance 
and efficiency of LLMs, making them more accessible and 
practical for a wider range of applications. 
In conclusion, the development of our hardware-accelerated 
speculative decoding system has been a challenging yet 
rewarding endeavor. The lessons learned from this project will 
undoubtedly inform and inspire future efforts in the field of 
LLMs and beyond. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we introduced the first specialized hardware 
support for speculative decoding in Large language models 
(LLMs). Our novel approach significantly enhances the 
performance and energy efficiency of LLM operations.  
Specifically, our hardware-accelerated speculative decoding 
achieves verification speeds that are 6.99 times and 7.74 times 
faster than those of the A100 and A6000 GPUs, respectively.  
Moreover, 
our 
approach 
demonstrates 
remarkable 
improvements in energy efficiency, being 117.95 times and 
159.66 times more energy-efficient than the A100 and A6000 
GPUs during the verification phase. These substantial gains 
highlight the potential of hardware-accelerated speculative 
decoding to overcome the computational challenges posed by 
large-scale LLMs, paving the way for more advanced and 
efficient applications in natural language processing. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. B. Brown et al., “Language Models are Few-Shot Learners,” in Proc. 
of NeurIPS, 2020. 
[2] 
F. W. Burton, “Speculative Computation, Parallelism, and Functional 
Programming,” IEEE Trans. Computers, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 1190–1193, 
1985. 
[3] 
C. Chen, et al., “Accelerating Large Language Model Decoding with 
Speculative Sampling,” arXiv preprint arXiv: 2302.01318, 2023. 
[4] 
Hanchenye, “scalehls,” GitHub repository. GitHub, 2024. 
[5] 
I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio, 
“Quantized Neural Networks: Training Neural Networks with Low 
Precision Weights and Activations,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 1, 
pp. 6869–6898, Jan. 2017.  
[6] 
P. Labs, “gpt-fast,” GitHub repository. GitHub, 2024. 
[7] 
Y. Leviathan, M. Kalman, and Y. Matias, “Fast Inference from 
Transformers via Speculative Decoding,” in Proc. Of ICML, 2023. 
[8] 
Makslevental, ‘OpenHLS’, GitHub repository. GitHub, 2024. 
[9] 
A. Marchisio, D. Dura, M. Capra, M. Martina, G. Masera, and M. 
Shafique, “SwiftTron: An Efficient Hardware Accelerator for Quantized 
Transformers,” in Proc. of IJCNN, 2023. 
[10] X. Miao et al., “SpecInfer: Accelerating Large Language Model Serving 
with Tree-based Speculative Inference and Verification,” in Proc. Of 
ASPLOS, 2024. 
[11] M. Research, “OPT: Open Pre-trained Transformers”, GitHub repository. 
GitHub, 2023. 
[12] M. Research, “DeepSpeed”, GitHub repository. GitHub, 2024. 
[13] M. Research, “Llama”, GitHub repository. GitHub, 2024 
[14] S. Scardapane, M. Scarpiniti, E. Baccarelli, and A. Uncini, “Why Should 
We Add Early Exits to Neural Networks?”, Cogn. Comput., vol. 12, no. 
5, pp. 954–966, 2020. 
[15] H. Touvron et al., “LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language 
Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023. 
[16] A. Vaswani et al., ‘Attention is All you Need’, in Proc. of NeurIPS, 2017. 
[17] Wang, Siqi, et al., “Minions: Accelerating Large Language Model 
Inference with Adaptive and Collective Speculative Decoding,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2402.15678, 2024. 
[18] Dubey, Abhimanyu, et al., “The Llama 3 Herd of Models,” arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2407.21783, 2024. 
[19] Z. Ke, Y. Yin. “Tail Risk Alert Based on Conditional Autoregressive VaR 
by Regression Quantiles and Machine Learning Algorithms,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2412.06193, 2024. 
[20] Ke, Z., et al., “A Consolidated Volatility Prediction with Back 
Propagation Neural Network and Genetic Algorithm,” arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2412.07223, 2024. 
[21] Z. Chen, et al., “Cascade Speculative Drafting for Even Faster LLM 
Inference,” in Proc. of NeurIPS, 2024. 
[22] H. Xu, Y. Li, and S. Ji, “LlamaF: An Efficient Llama2 Architecture 
Accelerator on Embedded FPGAs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11424, 
2024. 
[23] Wei, Jason, et al., “Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in 
Large Language Models,” in Proc. of NeurIPS, 2022. 
[24] Y. Jiang, F. Ilievski, and K. Ma, “BRAINTEASER: Lateral Thinking 
Puzzles for Large Language Model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05057, 
2023. 
[25] N. Behari, E. Zhang, Y. Zhao, A. Taneja, D. Nagaraj, and M. Tambe, “A 
Decision-Language Model (DLM) for Dynamic Restless Multi-Armed 
Bandit Tasks in Public Health,” in Proc. of NeurIPS, 2024. 
[26] H. Xu, J. Ye, Y. Li, and H. Chen, “Can Speculative Sampling Accelerate 
ReAct Without Compromising Reasoning Quality?” in Tiny ICLR, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
