Reinforcement Learning for Self-Improving Agent with Skill Library
Jiongxiao Wang1*
Qiaojing Yan2
Yawei Wang2
Yijun Tian2
Soumya Smruti Mishra2
Zhichao Xu2
Megha Gandhi2
Panpan Xu2†
Lin Lee Cheong2
1University of Wisconsin–Madison; 2AWS Agentic AI
jwang2929@wisc.edu; {qiaojiny, yawenwan, yijunt, soumish, xzhichao, ganmegha, xupanpan, lcheong}@amazon.com
Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents
have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
complex reasoning and multi-turn interactions
but struggle to continuously improve and adapt
when deployed in new environments.
One
promising approach is implementing skill li-
braries that allow agents to learn, validate, and
apply new skills. However, current skill library
approaches rely primarily on LLM prompting,
making consistent skill library implementation
challenging. To overcome these challenges, we
propose a Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based
approach to enhance agents’ self-improvement
capabilities with a skill library. Specifically,
we introduce Skill Augmented GRPO for self-
Evolution (SAGE), a novel RL framework that
systematically incorporates skills into learn-
ing. The framework’s key component, Sequen-
tial Rollout, iteratively deploys agents across
a chain of similar tasks for each rollout. As
agents navigate through the task chain, skills
generated from previous tasks accumulate in
the library and become available for subse-
quent tasks. Additionally, the framework en-
hances skill generation and utilization through
a Skill-integrated Reward that complements
the original outcome-based rewards. Experi-
mental results on AppWorld demonstrate that
SAGE, when applied to supervised-finetuned
model with expert experience, achieves 8.9%
higher Scenario Goal Completion while re-
quiring 26% fewer interaction steps and gen-
erating 59% fewer tokens, substantially out-
performing existing approaches in both accu-
racy and efficiency. Our code is available at
https://github.com/amazon-science/SAGE.
1
Introduction
Large language model (LLM)-based agents have
been widely applied to automate complex tasks
*Work was done during an internship at AWS Agentic AI.
†Corresponding author: Panpan Xu, Email: xupanpan@
amazon.com
through active environmental interactions, includ-
ing coding agent (Yang et al., 2024; Novikov et al.,
2025), deep research (OpenAI, 2025), assistant
agent (Yao et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025), and
web browsing (Yao et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024).
To enhance the performance of these multi-turn in-
teractive agents, researchers have successfully inte-
grated reinforcement learning (RL) techniques into
their frameworks (Chen et al., 2025; Qi et al., 2025;
Zhou et al., 2025a; Wang et al., 2025a). Recent
advances, particularly in reinforcement learning
with verifiable rewards (RLVR) (Shao et al., 2024;
Guo et al., 2025), have enabled effective end-to-end
agent training for improved performance (Jin et al.,
2025). However, despite RL’s effectiveness, sig-
nificant limitations persist: RL-trained agents are
often limited to specific training scenarios (Zheng
et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024). When deployed in
new environments, they struggle to demonstrate
continual learning capabilities to effectively utilize
valuable on-going experiences for future tasks.
To address these limitations, one potential solu-
tion is enabling agents to transform their previous
interaction experiences into reusable skills, which
can be stored in a skill library for future reference.
When agents encounter similar tasks, these pre-
viously acquired skills can be leveraged through
experience replay to improve task success rates,
particularly in scenarios that were not encountered
during training but experienced during deployment.
Furthermore, since each skill is composed of a list
of actions, utilization of these skills can enhance
agent efficiency by condensing complex action se-
quences into reusable operations.
Recent research has made significant strides in
enabling agents to compose reusable skills (Wang
et al., 2024a; Cai et al., 2024; Nguyen et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024c; Zheng et al., 2025; Wang et al.,
2025b). For instance, Wang et al. (2025b) focuses
on inducing high-level web browsing skills from
successful action trajectories, transforming primi-
1
arXiv:2512.17102v2  [cs.AI]  10 Mar 2026

Figure 1: Illustration for Skill Library Agent and Sequential Rollout with Skill-integrated Reward.
tive actions like click and search into more complex
operations such as search product. While these
works have demonstrated the effectiveness of skill
libraries for deployed agents, they predominantly
rely on manually crafted prompts for skill genera-
tion and utilization. This prompt-based approach,
however, is inherently constrained by the instruc-
tion following capabilities of the base model, lim-
iting both the quality and adaptability of the skill
library.
In this paper, we explore enhancing agents’ self-
improvement capabilities through RL with a skill
library. Given the diverse frameworks of agents for
various tasks, we focus specifically on tool-using
agents that interact with environments through API
calls and receive corresponding feedback. Our
implementation extends the CodeAct framework
(Wang et al., 2024b), which enables agents to com-
pose code by combining multiple APIs with ba-
sic programming constructs (such as for loops)
to solve complex tasks. Building upon this foun-
dation, we develop a specialized framework for
self-improving agents with skill library (referred
to as skill library agents for simplicity). Unlike
previous frameworks such as Agent Skill Induc-
tion (Wang et al., 2025b), which typically define
reusable skills only after task completion, we im-
plement a unified format for both task solving and
skill generation, following Nguyen et al. (2024).
In our approach, when the agent model interacts
with the environment through APIs, it generates
programmatic functions that can be saved as skills
and subsequently called to execute, rather than us-
ing multiple APIs directly. Given that in-context
prompting struggles to adapt open-source models
to this newly proposed skill library agent, super-
vised fine-tuning (SFT) is first applied before RL
using high-quality trajectories collected through
expert experience generated by advanced LLMs.
Based on the SFT model, we propose a novel RL
framework for skill library agents. Traditional RL
approaches typically consider rewards only for in-
dividual examples, limiting their scope to ongoing
task performance. For skill library agents, the focus
is on developing high-quality, reusable skills while
improving accurate skill usage from the library for
task optimization. To realize this, we extend Group
Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al.,
2024) and propose Skill Augmented GRPO for
self-Evolution (SAGE), consisting of Sequential
Rollout and Skill-integrated Reward. Instead of
single-task trajectories, the agent is trained with
chains of similar tasks. We implement the Sequen-
tial Rollout process on the task chain, where skills
generated in the previous tasks are preserved and
made available for use in the following ones. Under
this framework, the final Skill-integrated Reward is
computed as the sum of two components: the veri-
fiable outcome-based reward and an extra reward
for high-quality skill generation and utilization.
To evaluate the effectiveness of SAGE for skill li-
brary agents, we conducted experiments on the Ap-
pWorld dataset (Trivedi et al., 2024), where agents
interact with their environment through API docu-
2

mentation lookup, API calls, and logical program-
ming constructs to solve complex practical tasks.
AppWorld utilizes the Scenario Goal Completion
(SGC) metric, which measures the success rate
of scenarios where all three similar tasks within
a scenario are successfully completed. This met-
ric effectively evaluates how well generated skills
transfer across similar tasks. After applying SAGE
to Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct, we observe significant
improvements compared to prompting-based ap-
proaches. Our method achieves more than 3x SGC
score while requiring less than half of generated
tokens. Analysis of skill utilization reveals that
agents trained with SAGE demonstrate more than
2x success rates when utilizing learned skills.
Furthermore, our approach achieves state-of-the-
art performance on both Test Normal and Test Chal-
lenge datasets compared to previous training meth-
ods which also applied RL but without a skill li-
brary. For example, our method achieves 72.0%
Task Goal Completion (TGC) and 60.7% SGC with
an average of 12.1 interaction steps and 1,475 gen-
erated tokens on the Test Normal set. This repre-
sents substantial improvement over baseline train-
ing with GRPO, which achieved 69.2% TGC and
51.8% SGC while requiring 16.4 average steps and
3,613 tokens. These improvements demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in enhancing both
task performance and efficiency through the skill
library agent.
2
Related Work
LLM-based Agent.
Recent advancements in
instruction-tuned LLMs have enabled them to fol-
low user instructions for interacting with exter-
nal environments as autonomous agents. Various
frameworks have been developed to enhance these
backbone LLMs’ capabilities in performing agentic
tasks. Yao et al. (2023) pioneered a "reason-then-
act" pipeline, guiding LLMs to generate interactive
actions for agents after a text reasoning process.
Erdogan et al. (2025) extended this approach by
incorporating an additional planning phase. Ad-
ditionally, Wang et al. (2024b) demonstrated that
generating executable Python code and then run
it within a code interpreter could significantly im-
prove agent performance. To further enhance agent
capabilities, researchers have applied both super-
vised fine-tuning (Schick et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023; Zeng et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) and re-
inforcement learning (Song et al., 2024; Bai et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2025a; Chen et al., 2025; Qi
et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025a) to develop more
effective and adaptive agent backbone LLMs.
Self-Improving Agent with Skill Library. While
RL algorithms have enabled agents to self-improve
through valuable experiences explored during roll-
outs (Zhou et al., 2025b; Putta et al., 2024; Qi et al.,
2025), enabling continuous self-improvement after
deployment, especially in new environments, re-
mains challenging. Wang et al. (2024a) pioneered
the use of a skill library to record successful be-
haviors for later retrieval in Minecraft exploration.
Subsequently, numerous studies have demonstrated
the effectiveness of such skill libraries across vari-
ous agentic tasks, including web exploration (Wang
et al., 2024c; Zheng et al., 2025; Wang et al.,
2025b), computer control (Zheng et al., 2024b; Wu
et al., 2024), and math problems (Nguyen et al.,
2024). These skills can take two forms: natural
language experience memories serving as a refer-
ence, or executable skills that can be directly im-
plemented in the environment. In this paper, we
focus on leveraging RL to enhance agents’ self-
improvement capabilities by teaching them to gen-
erate executable skills for the skill library during
test time.
3
Method
In this section, we first detail the skill library agent.
We then present our new RL framework specifi-
cally designed to integrate the skill library during
training process. An illustrative figure of our skill
library agent and Sequential Rollout with Skill-
integrated Reward design is shown in Figure 1.
3.1
Skill Library Agent
Before implementing RL, we first need to develop a
self-improving agent that integrates the skill library
for tool-using agents. This framework will serve
as the foundation for RL rollout process and task
evaluations.
Existing frameworks for skill library agents,
such as Agent Skill Induction (Wang et al., 2025b),
Agent Workflow Memory (Wang et al., 2024c),
and Voyager (Wang et al., 2024a), typically de-
fine reusable skills after completing entire tasks.
While this approach allows agents to observe com-
plete task trajectories before determining skill defi-
nitions, it limits the RL process in two ways: (1) In
long-horizon tasks, the additional skill generation
process further extends the context length, poten-
3

tially exceeding the model’s limitations; (2) The
separation between task execution and skill gen-
eration creates an inconsistency that may impact
learning effectiveness.
To address these limitations, we follow the Dy-
naSaur approach (Nguyen et al., 2024) and imple-
ment a unified format for both task solving and skill
generation. Specifically, when the agent model in-
teracts with the API environments, it first generates
a skill function and then calls it to process, instead
of using multiple APIs. An example of the format
difference is presented in Appendix A.
Formally, given a task set Q, our agent is de-
signed to perform online learning from start to
finish with a skill library M, which can be ini-
tialized with either an empty set or previously de-
fined skills. For each task q ∼Q, the agent first
retrieves a skill subset [a1, ..., ak] from the skill
library M and adds them into context before per-
forming the task. After that, the agent can auto-
matically perform the following actions to interact
with the skill library: (1) Skill Usage: Perform
skill ai ∈[a1, ..., ak] to process the task; (2) Skill
Generation: Define a skill function ˆa composed of
multiple actions aimed at solving the task and then
immediately call it to process the task; (3) Skill
Update: If the skill a, either from the skill library
or newly defined, fails to execute, update the skill
and recall it to process the task; (4) Skill Save: If
the skill can be executed without error, add the new
skill or update the existing skill in the skill library
M. Additionally, direct API calls are allowed for
cases where defining a function skill is unnecessary
for task processing.
3.2
SAGE for Skill Library Agent
We begin the description of our SAGE framework
by introducing the preliminary GRPO algorithms,
followed by our specifically-designed components
for skill library agents: Sequential Rollout and
Skill-integrated Reward.
3.2.1
Preliminary
In this paper, we build our SAGE based on GRPO
(Shao et al., 2024). For each query q, GRPO first
samples a group of outputs {o1, ..., oG} from the
old policy πθold and then optimizes the policy by
maximizing the following objective:
JGRPO(θ) =E[q∼Q,{oi}G
i=1∼πθold(O|q)]
1
G
G
X
i=1
1
|oi|
|oi|
X
t=1
{min[si,t ˆAi,t,
clip (si,t, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAi,t] −βDKL}
where si,t =
πθ(oi,t|q,oi,<t)
πθold(oi,t|q,oi,<t), ϵ is the clip ratio
and β is the ratio of KL penalty between pol-
icy model πθ and reference model πref.
ˆAi,t is
the advantage calculated based on the relative re-
wards of the outputs inside each group. Given
rewards r = {r1, r2, ..., rG} of the outputs un-
der the same group, the advantage is defined as
ˆAi,t = ri−mean(r)
std(r)
.
3.2.2
Sequential Rollout
A principled method to augment agents’ self-
improving ability with skill library is through end-
to-end RL. However, skill generation and usage
processes often need multiple tasks to reveal the
quality of skills. One potential solution to enabling
the end-to-end RL is that instead of one task, we
could give the agent a chain of tasks. Then a se-
quential rollout process is performed across these
tasks, enabling the agent to progressively accumu-
late skills in its library throughout the task chain.
Any skills learned in earlier tasks could be used in
subsequent tasks. In this way, rewards signal from
the successful usage of skills in later tasks can be
back-propagated to the skill generation in the pre-
vious tasks. To ensure that the generated skills can
be immediately applied to subsequent tasks, we
construct the sequential tasks with examples under
the same scenario, in which all tasks share similar
instructions.
While a longer task chain with multiple exam-
ples would better approximate practical sequential
evaluation processes on the whole test set, it would
significantly increase training costs. For simplicity,
this paper focuses on task chains containing only
two examples. A detailed discussion of Sequential
Rollout with extended task chains is provided in
Appendix B.
3.2.3
Skill-integrated Reward
Unlike baseline RL that relies on outcome-based
rewards, our training framework incorporates addi-
tional rewards specifically designed for the agent’s
interactions with the skill library. For this purpose,
4

we introduce the Skill-integrated Reward. Specifi-
cally, we aim to encourage two additional behaviors
across a two-example task chain: skill generation in
the first example and skill utilization in the second
example.
Formally, let r1, r2 ∈[0, 1] denote the verifiable
outcome-based rewards of the task chain (q1, q2)
collected from Sequential Rollout, where the skills
generated by q1 are directly utilized by q2. We
formulate Skill-integrated Rewards R1 and R2 as:
(
R1 = r1 + 1[r1 = 1] ∗1[r2 = 1] ∗1skill(q2|q1)
R2 = r2 + 1[r2 = 1] ∗1skill(q2|q1)
where indicator 1skill(q2|q1) denotes whether q2
uses skills generated by q1; and 1[r = 1] repre-
sents whether the outcome-based reward equals 1,
i.e. successful task completion. To ensure the skill
library agent adheres to a specific format that gen-
erates code for each interaction, we impose a -1.0
penalty reward specifically on responses where the
agent provides no code and terminates the task.
3.2.4
SAGE
After collecting the rollout trajectories and comput-
ing the corresponding rewards, we implement our
Skill Augmented GRPO for self-Evolution (SAGE)
to train the skill library agent. Following Chen et al.
(2025), we choose not to use the KL divergence
penalty and the advantage would not be normalized
by standard deviation of the rewards.
Given the current policy πθ and the old pol-
icy πθold, we first sample task chains from the
original data distribution: (q1, q2) ∼Q.
For
each task pair, we then perform G group rollout
{τi}G
i=1 ∼πθold(·|(q1, q2)), where τi represents the
Sequential Rollout trajectory collected by sequen-
tially processing (q1, q2). To differentiate outputs
for each task query in τi, we define ok
i ∈τi as
the ith output for qk in the group, where k is the
chain index. The current policy is then optimized
by maximizing the following objective function for
skill library-integrated GRPO:
JAgent(θ) = E(q1,q2)∼Q,{τi}G
i=1∼πθold(·|(q1,q2))
1
G
G
X
i=1
2
X
k=1
1
|ok
i |
|ok
i |
X
t=1
{min[sk
i,t ˆAk
i ,
clip

sk
i,t, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ

ˆAk
i ]}
where sk
i,t =
πθ(ok
i,t|qk,Mk
i ,ok
i,<t)
πθold(ok
i,t|qk,Mk
i ,ok
i,<t)); and ˆAk
i
=
Rk
i −mean({Rk
i |i = 1, 2, .., G}). sk
i,t represents
the importance sampling term; ˆAk
i is the advan-
tage computed by the Skill-integrated Reward Rk
i ;
Mk
i denotes the skill library integrated with the
query qk
i for group i. Here M1
i is an empty set and
M2
i includes skills generated when performing q1
i .
Since our skill library agents need multi-turn inter-
actions with the environments to process the task,
the outputs |ok
i | only consider the LLM generation
contents, while the observations from the environ-
ment are masked.
The key differences between our approach and
the original GRPO described in Section 3.2.1 are
highlighted in red. In our method, due to the Se-
quential Rollout mechanism, the expectation is
computed across the task chain. Notably, within the
same group, the generations o2
i are derived from dif-
ferent skill libraries M2
i , unlike the original GRPO
where generations stem from identical queries.
4
Experiments
We begin this section with the details of our experi-
mental settings followed by the presentation of our
main results. Further analysis and ablation studies
are conducted to better demonstrate the effective-
ness of SAGE.
4.1
Experimental Settings
Dataset and Base Model. To evaluate the effective-
ness of SAGE for skill library agents, particularly
for those designed for long-horizon tool usage, we
adopt the AppWorld dataset (Trivedi et al., 2024).
AppWorld contains 750 tasks from 250 task scenar-
ios. Each scenario consists of three tasks sharing
similar instructions. The scenario-based structure
of AppWorld makes it well-suited for Sequential
Rollout, as tasks within the same scenario natu-
rally form a task chain. We utilize the Train set
for all training steps, including SFT and subse-
quent SAGE. The Dev set guides the best check-
point selection during training. Evaluation is per-
formed on both Test-Normal and Test-Challenge
splits. More details about the dataset are presented
in Appendix C.
To ensure a fair comparison with the previous
work (Chen et al., 2025) on AppWorld, we used
Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct (Qwen, 2024) as our base
model for training purpose.
Skill Library Agent. Following the ReAct agent
(Yao et al., 2023) as presented in the AppWorld
paper (Trivedi et al., 2024), we implemented our
skill library agent with a specifically designed in-
5

context example and detailed instructions to guide
the base model in using the skill library to perform
complex tasks. The detailed prompt of our skill
library agent is presented in Appendix D. Regard-
ing skill retrieval, we employed an idealized case
during sequential rollout where skills are retained
and utilized only within the same scenario in the
task chain. This approach eliminates the need for
a retrieval model, significantly simplifying the RL
rollout processes. While our default evaluation
uses the ideal case (Same Scenario) with provided
scenario labels from the test set, we conducted
additional analysis on various retrieval methods to
address real-world scenarios where such labels may
not be available.
Baseline GRPO. Since the baseline method LOOP
(Chen et al., 2025) does not provide source code
or model, and their paper does not report agent
efficiency metrics, it is challenging to make a di-
rect, fair comparison. Therefore, we implemented
our own baseline training using the GRPO method
without Skill Library for comparison purposes. Fol-
lowing Chen et al. (2025), our baseline GRPO re-
moves the KL divergence penalty and calculates
advantage using the mean reward within the group
instead of normalizing by the standard error. The
only difference between our baseline GRPO and
LOOP is that we perform strictly on-policy RL
without PPO epochs. More training settings of
Baseline GRPO are presented in Appendix E.
SAGE. Initial RL experiments with open-source
models revealed their limited capabilities in fol-
lowing instructions when integrated with our
skill library agent, despite carefully designed
prompts. This limitation resulted in insufficient
self-improvement capabilities, hampering the gen-
eration of high-quality sequential rollouts neces-
sary for our SAGE. Thus, we first implemented
supervised fine-tuning prior to RL using an expert
experience dataset. For simplicity, we employed
an advanced model, specifically Claude 3.5 Sonnet
V2, as the expert to produce high-quality trajecto-
ries within the skill library agent. The experimental
details of expert data generation for SFT are shown
in Appendix F. Based on the SFT model, we then
performed our SAGE with sequential rollout and
skill-integrated reward. Details of training parame-
ters and processes are listed in Appendix G.
Metrics and Evaluation.
We assessed perfor-
mance using two primary metrics: Task Goal
Completion (TGC) measures the accuracy of suc-
cessfully completed individual tasks; and Scenario
Goal Completion (SGC) calculates the proportion
of scenarios where all three included tasks are suc-
cessfully completed. To evaluate efficiency, we
counted average interaction steps (Avg. Steps) and
average generated tokens (Avg. Tokens) required
for task completion, where fewer steps and tokens
indicate more efficiency. All reported numbers in
this paper represent the average of three agent eval-
uation runs using the same model.
4.2
Main Results
Table 1 presents our main results of SAGE com-
pared with various baselines.
From the table,
we can observe that SAGE demonstrates signifi-
cantly improved performance compared to the base-
line GRPO, particularly a 8.9% improvement in
SGC (Scenario Goal Completion) on test normal
dataset. Since SGC measures the agent’s perfor-
mance across multiple related tasks within a sce-
nario, this improvement demonstrates our model’s
ability to effectively transfer and reuse skills across
similar tasks.
Additionally, skill library agent
trained by SAGE significantly reduces average in-
teraction steps and generated tokens, with 59% less
tokens compared to the baseline agent trained by
GRPO. This demonstrates that skill reuse can ac-
complish complex tasks more efficiently at lower
cost. Although our final results rely on SFT using
expert experience data generated by Claude, our RL
approach with the skill library enables open-source
models to surpass the expert performance.
For the results of our approach, we presented the
findings in a stepwise manner to better demonstrate
the improvements achieved at each stage (prompt-
ing based skill library agent, SFT, and SAGE). Ini-
tially, when compared to the baseline training-free
approach using the Qwen2.5 32B Instruction model
with ReAct agent, our skill library agent shows
lower performance, indicating the limitations of
prompt-based methods for self-improving agent
with skill library. The performance significantly
improves after SFT with expert experience gener-
ated by Claude, though still not surpassing the base-
line GRPO without skill library. This indicates that
merely imitating expert behaviors is insufficient
for optimized performance. Ultimately, our RL
method further enhances the SFT-trained model,
achieving superior performance compared to all
baselines. To better understand how our approach
enhances task performance with skill library, we
provide examples of actual task execution across
different agent models in Appendix H.
6

Table 1: Task Performance of SAGE compared with various baselines. Results of Methods marked with "*" are
taken from (Chen et al., 2025). In these cases, Avg. Steps and Tokens were not reported, thus denoted by "- -".
Base Model
Methods
Test Normal
Test Challenge
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Tokens
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Token
Training Free Methods
GPT-4o
ReAct*
48.8
32.1
- -
- -
30.2
13.0
- -
- -
OpenAI o1
ReAct*
61.9
41.1
- -
- -
36.7
19.4
- -
- -
Claude Sonnet 3.5 V2
ReAct
57.1
41.1
15.7
1,542
49.2
28.8
21.8
2,084
Qwen2.5 32B Instruct
ReAct*
39.2 ± 3.5
18.6 ± 2.0
- -
- -
21.0 ± 1.4
7.5 ± 1.2
- -
- -
RL without Skill Library
Qwen2.5 32B Instruct
LOOP*
71.3 ± 1.3
53.6 ± 2.2
- -
- -
45.7 ± 1.3
26.6 ± 1.5
- -
- -
GRPO
69.2 ± 2.7
51.8 ± 5.8
16.4 ± 0.2
3,613 ± 200
40.7 ± 1.5
26.9 ± 1.5
21.9 ± 0.1
5,211 ± 65
Our Approach
Qwen2.5 32B Instruct
Skill Library Agent
30.7 ± 3.1
19.6 ± 1.4
13.4 ± 0.4
2,988 ± 73
15.3 ± 1.7
7.0 ± 1.2
18.7 ± 0.4
4,803 ± 117
+ SFT
55.2 ± 1.5
41.7 ± 1.7
11.4 ± 0.5
1,340 ± 65
37.2 ± 1.2
20.9 ± 1.8
16.2 ± 0.3
1,909 ± 80
+ SAGE
72.0 ± 1.5
60.7 ± 1.5
12.1 ± 0.2
1,475 ± 127
50.1 ± 2.0
32.4 ± 3.7
17.3 ± 0.3
1,807 ± 29
Figure 2: Analysis of Skill Usage Patterns. Performance
metrics are shown as ratios relative to Base Model base-
line, with numerical values annotated.
4.3
Skill Library Usage Analysis
Though SAGE has reached state-of-the-art per-
formance on AppWorld, it remains unclear how
skill library are actually involved during evalua-
tion. This section provides a detailed analysis of
skill library usage patterns at each stage of our ap-
proach. We employ various metrics to evaluate skill
library utilization during evaluation. (1) Skill Us-
age Rate: Among examples with skill library, the
proportion that use skills; (2) Success Skill Usage
Rate: Among examples that use skills, the propor-
tion that reach successful task completion; (3) Skill
Library Size: Total number of generated skills in
the skill library; (4) Used Skill Num: Number of
skills in the skill library being used. The analysis
results are summarized in Figure 2.
Analysis of the results reveals that SAGE signif-
icantly improves both Skill Usage Rate and Suc-
cess Skill Usage Rate compared to previous steps.
This improvement demonstrates enhanced skill uti-
lization and self-improving capabilities developed
during the RL process. The Base Model shows
high Skill Usage Rate and Skill Library Size, in-
dicating its fundamental ability to generate and
use skills in response to instructional prompts. Al-
though the Base Model generates more skills than
SAGE, its lower Used Skill Num and Success Skill
Usage Rate indicate limitations in both skill gener-
ation quality and utilization effectiveness. Notably,
the SFT model only surpasses the Base Model in
Success Skill Usage Rate. This outcome may be
attributed to the limitations of SFT from expert ex-
periences. While these experiences enhance overall
performance, they appear insufficient for develop-
ing the model’s self-improvement capabilities in
skill generation and usage.
4.4
Ablation Studies
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of SAGE,
we perform ablation studies shown as follows:
Evaluation without Skills. To validate that the
inclusion of the skill library indeed contributes to
better performance, we conducted additional evalu-
ations of the skill library agent but with an empty
skill library, on the test normal dataset.
Table 2: Stepwise performance of skill library agent
compared with no skills involved.
Step
With Skill
Test Normal
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Tokens
Skill Library
✓
30.7 ± 3.1
19.6 ± 1.4
13.4 ± 0.4
2,988 ± 73
Agent
×
34.7 ± 3.0
14.9 ± 3.1
16.4 ± 0.5
3,704 ± 139
SFT
✓
55.2 ± 1.5
41.7 ± 1.7
11.4 ± 0.5
1,340 ± 65
×
54.8 ± 2.1
39.9 ± 2.2
13.5 ± 0.1
1,611 ± 11
SAGE
✓
72.0 ± 1.5
60.7 ± 1.5
12.1 ± 0.2
1,475 ± 127
×
71.4 ± 0.5
54.8 ± 0.8
16.0 ± 0.2
1,937 ± 81
As shown in Table 2, all agent models achieve
improved SGC scores with reduced average steps
and tokens when employing skills compared to
7

no skill settings. This improvement highlights the
importance of incorporating the skill library to en-
hance SGC performance and task efficiency, even
in the absence of training. However, we observe
a decline in TGC scores for Skill Library Agent.
This decline may be attributed to the models’ lim-
ited proficiency in skill utilization, resulting in in-
appropriate skill applications and consequent task
failures, as detailed in Section 4.3.
Skill Library Agent with Retrieval in Practice.
In practical applications, tasks often lack explicit
scenario information that would enable direct skill
acquisition from the same scenario as used dur-
ing training. To address this limitation, we imple-
mented an additional retrieval process that iden-
tifies and leverages relevant skills from previous
experiences during evaluation. Specifically, we
explored three different retrieval methods: Query
N-gram, Query Embedding, and Skill Embedding.
Table 3: SAGE with different retrieval methods.
Retrieval Methods
Test Normal
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Tokens
Same Scenario
72.0 ± 1.5
60.7 ± 1.5
12.1 ± 0.2
1,475 ± 127
Query N-gram
72.0 ± 2.0
60.1 ± 1.7
12.7 ± 0.3
1,466 ± 101
Query Embedding
69.6 ± 1.6
59.5 ± 2.2
11.8 ± 0.2
1,335 ± 63
Skill Embedding
66.3 ± 0.7
56.0 ± 0.8
14.5 ± 0.3
1,692 ± 10
The results in Table 3 show that retrieval method
selection significantly impacts performance. Care-
fully designed skill retrieval mechanisms can ap-
proach or even partially outperform the best per-
formance achieved under Same Scenario condi-
tions. A comprehensive description of each re-
trieval method, along with detailed results analysis,
can be found in Appendix I.
Reward Design. To demonstrate the effectiveness
of our Skill-integrated Reward design, we con-
ducted ablation studies comparing it with two alter-
native reward designs: Outcome-based Reward and
Chain-based Reward. Details of the alternative re-
ward designs and their corresponding formulations
are included in the Appendix J.1.
Table 4: SAGE with different reward designs.
Reward Design
Test Normal
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Tokens
Skill-integrated
72.0 ± 1.5
60.7 ± 1.5
12.1 ± 0.2
1,475 ± 127
Outcome-based
69.8 ± 1.0
55.4 ± 1.4
13.1 ± 0.2
1,469 ± 61
Chain-based
67.9 ± 2.1
56.6 ± 1.6
15.7 ± 0.3
1,361 ± 58
As shown in Table 4, our Skill-integrated Re-
ward design achieves superior TGC and SGC
scores compared to alternative reward designs. Re-
garding efficiency, while Skill-integrated Reward
yields the lowest Avg. Seps, it results in relatively
high Avg. Tokens. This trade-off likely stems from
skill usage reducing the number of steps while re-
quiring additional tokens for skill generation. We
further analyze the skill library usage behaviors
across different reward designs through additional
studies (similar to Section 4.3) in Appendix J.2.
RL Initialization. In this paper, we initialized
SAGE using SFT. To demonstrate the necessity of
using extra data for SFT before RL, we conducted
ablation studies with various initialization methods
including Base Model, Self-Distillation and RL
Warm-Up (detailed in Appendix K).
Table 5: SAGE initialized with different methods.
Initialization
Extra
Test Normal
Methods
Data
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Tokens
Base Model
×
40.7 ± 2.3
25.6 ± 0.7
11.9 ± 0.1
2,532 ± 93
Self Distillation
×
66.5 ± 1.6
53.6 ± 5.3
13.1 ± 0.4
2,321 ± 103
RL Warm-Up
×
68.3 ± 0.7
55.3 ± 3.8
16.0 ± 0.3
2,556 ± 62
SFT
✓
72.0 ± 1.5
60.7 ± 1.5
12.1 ± 0.2
1,475 ± 127
The comparative results in Table 5 demonstrate
that SAGE, when initialized with SFT on the expert
experience dataset, significantly outperforms other
approaches. This underscores the crucial role of
expert trajectories in guiding the agent model to-
wards state-of-the-art performance while maintain-
ing high efficiency. Among the methods without
extra data, RL Warm-up shows better performance
compared to Self Distillation, while training di-
rectly from the Base Model yields notably poor
results. These findings further indicate the base
model’s limited capability in skill library usage and
its inadequacy for generating high-quality trajecto-
ries during rollouts without proper initialization.
SFT Initialized Baseline GRPO. For a fair com-
parison, we also conducted experiments using SFT
to initialize baseline GRPO. Even with this set-
ting, SAGE demonstrates significantly better per-
formance. Detailed experimental settings, results,
and analyses are presented in Appendix L.
5
Conclusion
This paper presents a pioneering work in explor-
ing the application of RL to self-improving agents
with skill library. To achieve this, we propose a
novel RL framework named SAGE, which incor-
porates GRPO with Sequential Rollout and Skill-
8

integrated Reward. When applied to AppWorld
datasets, our approach enables the skill library
agent to significantly outperform baselines in both
performance and efficiency, paving the way for
enhanced self-improvement capabilities with skill
libraries through RL.
Limitations
In this paper, we conducted experiments exclu-
sively on the AppWorld dataset to demonstrate
the effectiveness of SAGE for skill library agent.
We chose this dataset because its simulated envi-
ronment more closely resembles real-world appli-
cation scenarios. However, we acknowledge that
different scenarios may require different agent de-
signs, even when applying similar skill library ap-
proaches. In future work, we plan to extend our
evaluation to other tool-using agent datasets.
References
Hao Bai, Yifei Zhou, Jiayi Pan, Mert Cemri, Alane
Suhr, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. 2024. Di-
girl: Training in-the-wild device-control agents with
autonomous reinforcement learning. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:12461–
12495.
Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen,
and Denny Zhou. 2024. Large language models as
tool makers. In The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Baian Chen, Chang Shu, Ehsan Shareghi, Nigel Collier,
Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Fireact:
Toward language agent fine-tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.05915.
Kevin Chen, Marco Cusumano-Towner, Brody Hu-
val, Aleksei Petrenko, Jackson Hamburger, Vladlen
Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. 2025. Reinforce-
ment learning for long-horizon interactive llm agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01600.
Lutfi Eren Erdogan, Hiroki Furuta, Sehoon Kim,
Nicholas
Lee,
Suhong
Moon,
Gopala
Anu-
manchipalli, Kurt Keutzer, and Amir Gholami. 2025.
Plan-and-act: Improving planning of agents for long-
horizon tasks. In Forty-second International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao
Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shi-
rong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025.
Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.12948.
Sam Ade Jacobs, Masahiro Tanaka, Chengming Zhang,
Minjia Zhang, Shuaiwen Leon Song, Samyam Rajb-
handari, and Yuxiong He. 2023. Deepspeed ulysses:
System optimizations for enabling training of ex-
treme long sequence transformer models.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.14509.
Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon,
Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei
Han. 2025. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and
leverage search engines with reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying
Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Effi-
cient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles.
Wei Li, William E Bishop, Alice Li, Christopher Rawles,
Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, Divya Tyamagundlu, and
Oriana Riva. 2024. On the effects of data scale on
ui control agents. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 37:92130–92154.
Dang Nguyen, Viet Dac Lai, Seunghyun Yoon, Ryan A
Rossi, Handong Zhao, Ruiyi Zhang, Puneet Mathur,
Nedim Lipka, Yu Wang, Trung Bui, and 1 others.
2024. Dynasaur: Large language agents beyond pre-
defined actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.01747.
Alexander Novikov, Ngân V˜u, Marvin Eisenberger,
Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wag-
ner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Fran-
cisco JR Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, and 1 others. 2025.
Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algo-
rithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131.
OpenAI.
2025.
Introducing
deep
re-
search.
https://openai.com/index/
introducing-deep-research/.
Pranav Putta, Edmund Mills, Naman Garg, Sumeet
Motwani, Chelsea Finn, Divyansh Garg, and Rafael
Rafailov. 2024. Agent q: Advanced reasoning and
learning for autonomous ai agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.07199.
Zehan Qi, Xiao Liu, Iat Long Iong, Hanyu Lai, Xueqiao
Sun, Jiadai Sun, Xinyue Yang, Yu Yang, Shuntian
Yao, Wei Xu, and 1 others. 2025. Webrl: Training
llm web agents via self-evolving online curriculum
reinforcement learning. In The Thirteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Qwen. 2024. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert:
Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
9

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta
Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-
moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023.
Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves
to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 36:68539–68551.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu,
Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, and 1 others. 2024.
Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300.
Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin
Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin
Lin, and Chuan Wu. 2024. Hybridflow: A flexible
and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:
2409.19256.
Yifan Song, Da Yin, Xiang Yue, Jie Huang, Sujian
Li, and Bill Yuchen Lin. 2024.
Trial and error:
Exploration-based trajectory optimization of llm
agents. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7584–7600.
Harsh Trivedi, Tushar Khot, Mareike Hartmann, Ruskin
Manku, Vinty Dong, Edward Li, Shashank Gupta,
Ashish Sabharwal, and Niranjan Balasubramanian.
2024. Appworld: A controllable world of apps and
people for benchmarking interactive coding agents.
In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 16022–16076.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-
dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and An-
ima Anandkumar. 2024a. Voyager: An open-ended
embodied agent with large language models. Trans-
actions on Machine Learning Research.
Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang,
Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. 2024b. Exe-
cutable code actions elicit better llm agents. In Pro-
ceedings of the 41st International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, pages 50208–50232.
Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue
Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Xing Jin, Kefan
Yu, Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, and 1 others.
2025a. Ragen: Understanding self-evolution in llm
agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.20073.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Graham Neu-
big, and Daniel Fried. 2025b. Inducing program-
matic skills for agentic tasks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.06821.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and
Graham Neubig. 2024c. Agent workflow memory.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07429.
Zhiyong Wu, Chengcheng Han, Zichen Ding, Zhenmin
Weng, Zhoumianze Liu, Shunyu Yao, Tao Yu, and
Lingpeng Kong. 2024. Os-copilot: Towards gener-
alist computer agents with self-improvement. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.07456.
Zhichao Xu, Fengran Mo, Zhiqi Huang, Crystina Zhang,
Puxuan Yu, Bei Wang, Jimmy Lin, and Vivek Sriku-
mar. 2025. A survey of model architectures in infor-
mation retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14822.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian
Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces
enable automated software engineering. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–
50652.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2022. Webshop: Towards scalable real-
world web interaction with grounded language agents.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:20744–20757.
Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2024. τ-bench: A benchmark for tool-
agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.12045.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
Aohan Zeng, Mingdao Liu, Rui Lu, Bowen Wang, Xiao
Liu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2024. Agenttuning:
Enabling generalized agent abilities for llms. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
ACL 2024, pages 3053–3077.
Jianguo Zhang, Tian Lan, Rithesh Murthy, Zhiwei Liu,
Weiran Yao, Juntao Tan, Thai Hoang, Liangwei Yang,
Yihao Feng, Zuxin Liu, and 1 others. 2024. Agento-
hana: Design unified data and training pipeline for
effective agent learning. CoRR.
Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang,
Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang,
Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren
Zhou. 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text
embedding and reranking through foundation models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176.
Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo,
Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid
Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, and 1 oth-
ers. 2023.
Pytorch fsdp:
experiences on scal-
ing fully sharded data parallel.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.11277.
Boyuan Zheng, Michael Y Fatemi, Xiaolong Jin,
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Yueqi Song,
Yu Gu, Jayanth Srinivasa, Gaowen Liu, Graham Neu-
big, and 1 others. 2025. Skillweaver: Web agents can
self-improve by discovering and honing skills. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.07079.
10

Boyuan Zheng, Boyu Gou, Jihyung Kil, Huan Sun, and
Yu Su. 2024a. Gpt-4v (ision) is a generalist web
agent, if grounded. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 61349–61385. PMLR.
Longtao Zheng, Rundong Wang, Xinrun Wang, and
Bo An. 2024b. Synapse: Trajectory-as-exemplar
prompting with memory for computer control. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan
Ye, Zheyan Luo, Zhangchi Feng, and Yongqiang Ma.
2024c. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning
of 100+ language models. In Proceedings of the
62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstra-
tions), Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou,
Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue
Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, and 1 others. 2024.
Webarena: A realistic web environment for building
autonomous agents. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Yifei Zhou, Song Jiang, Yuandong Tian, Jason Weston,
Sergey Levine, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Xian Li.
2025a.
Sweet-rl: Training multi-turn llm agents
on collaborative reasoning tasks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.15478.
Yifei Zhou, Qianlan Yang, Kaixiang Lin, Min Bai,
Xiong Zhou, Yu-Xiong Wang, Sergey Levine, and
Li Erran Li. 2025b. Proposer-agent-evaluator (pae):
Autonomous skill discovery for foundation model
internet agents. In Forty-second International Con-
ference on Machine Learning.
11

A
Interaction Format Example of Skill
Library Agent
In this section, we provide examples of the inter-
action format for Skill Library Agent compared
to the baseline agent on AppWorld. The follow-
ing Figure 3 and Figure 4 present one interaction
step of generating code to login the app Spotify for
baseline agent and skill library agent respectively.
Figure 3: The baseline agent directly generates codes to
process the task.
Figure 4: Skill Library Agent will first define a function
and then call it to process the task.
B
SAGE with Longer Task Chain in
Sequential Rollout
To help readers better understand our SAGE with
Sequential Rollout and Skill-integrated Reward, we
present a simple but effective case in Section 3.2
where only two example are involved for the task
chain. In fact, SAGE has a general format which
can be adapted to more than two tasks in the task
chain of Sequential Rollout.
Assuming that we sample K examples from
the dataset to form the task chain, denoted as
(q1, q2, .., qK) ∼Q, the Sequential Rollout pro-
cess is performed sequentially from q1 to qK with
a skill library, where skills are accumulated into
the library and become available to use for all sub-
sequent tasks within the task chain.
With the Sequential Rollout, here we present the
general format for our Skill-integrated Reward. Let
r1, r2, ..., rK ∈[0, 1] be the verifiable outcome-
based rewards of each task in the long task chain
(q1, q2, ..., qK), the general format for the Skill-
integrated Reward of the kth task Rk (1 < k < K)
can be formulated as:
Rk = rk
+ 1[rk = 1] ∗max
k<i≤K(1[ri = 1] ∗1skill(qi|qk))
+ 1[rk = 1] ∗1skill(qk|q1, ..., qk−1)
where 1skill(qk|q1, ..., qk−1) evaluates whether the
task qk uses the skills generated from previous
tasks q1, ..qk−1 in the task chain. For the special
cases of k = 1 and k = K, the reward becomes
slightly different. The first example (k = 1) begins
with an empty skill library, thus cannot utilize previ-
ous skills. The last example (k = K) cannot have
its generated skills verified by subsequent tasks.
Therefore, we formulate these boundary cases as:
R1 = r1 + 1[r1 = 1] ∗max
1<i≤K(1[ri = 1] ∗1skill(qi|q1))
RK = rK + 1[rK = 1] ∗1skill(qK|q1, ..., qK−1)
To summarize, the basic idea of Skill-integrated
Reward design is that beyond the task completion
rewards, the agent model receives additional 1.0
skill relevant rewards in two scenarios:
Skill Generation Reward - when successfully
completed task generates skills that are utilized in
at least one subsequent task within the task chain
and lead to its success task completion;
12

Skill Usage Reward - when the agent effectively
applies previously acquired skills from earlier tasks
to successfully complete the current task.
Similar to Section 3.2.4, we describe the gen-
eral format of SAGE as follows. Given the cur-
rent policy πθ and the old policy πθold, we first
sample task chain with K examples from the orig-
inal data distribution: (q1, q2, ..., qK) ∼Q. For
each task pair, we then perform G groups rollout
{τi}G
i=1 ∼πθold(·|(q1, q2, ..., qK)), where τi repre-
sents the Sequential Rollout trajectory collected by
sequentially processing (q1, q2, ..., qK). To differ-
entiate outputs for each task query in τi, we define
ok
i ∈τi as the ith outputs for qk in the group, where
k is the chain index. The current policy is then
optimized by maximizing the following objective
function for skill library integrated GRPO:
JAgent(θ) = E(q1,...,qK)∼Q,{τi}G
i=1∼πθold(·|(q1,...,qK))
1
G
G
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
1
|ok
i |
|ok
i |
X
t=1
{min[sk
i,t ˆAk
i ,
clip

sk
i,t, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ

ˆAk
i ]}
where sk
i,t =
πθ(ok
i,t|qk,Mk
i ,ok
i,<t)
πθold(ok
i,t|qk,Mk
i ,ok
i,<t)); and ˆAk
i
=
Rk
i −mean({Rk
i |i = 1, 2, .., G}). sk
i,t represents
the importance sampling term; ˆAk
i is the advantage
computed by the Skill-integrated Reward Rk
i ; Mk
i
denotes the skill library integrated for the query qk
i
for group i.
To better understand SAGE’s performance with
longer task chains during Sequential Rollout, we
extended our experiments by combining all three
tasks within one scenario into a continuous task
chain. This experiment maintained similar settings
to the original one described in Appendix G, with
one key modification: both batch size and mini-
batch size were increased to 576 to accommodate
the additional rollouts required by the longer task
chains. Table 6 compares the performance between
SAGE using three-example task chain and the orig-
inal two-example task chain.
Table 6: Performance of SAGE with longer task chain.
Task Chain
Test Normal
Length
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Tokens
2
72.0 ± 1.5
60.7 ± 1.5
12.1 ± 0.2
1,475 ± 127
3
70.6 ± 3.6
54.8 ± 4.2
14.3 ± 0.1
2,585 ± 13
The results indicate that longer task chains do
not necessarily improve the skill library agent’s
performance. This may be attributed to two factors:
(1) Reward Distribution Imbalance: Examples in
the task chain are typically clustered by similar in-
structions, leading to most relevant skills being gen-
erated during the first example’s execution. Conse-
quently, the first example predominantly receives
rewards for skill generation, while subsequent ex-
amples mainly receive rewards for skill utilization,
creating an asymmetric reward structure. (2) Gra-
dient Variance: As the chain lengthens, later tasks
begin with increasingly divergent skill libraries,
deviating from standard GRPO settings. This devi-
ation potentially leads to larger gradient variance,
which may adversely affect the final performance.
Besides, the iterative nature of Sequential Rollout
process results in substantially increased computa-
tional costs as the number of tasks grows. Given
these challenges and the empirically suboptimal
performance, we ultimately chose a two-example
task chain structure. This configuration allows the
first example to focus on skill generation while the
second emphasizes skill usage.
C
AppWorld Dataset
In AppWorld dataset (Trivedi et al., 2024), au-
tonomous agents are required to complete every-
day digital tasks (e.g., sending messages and trans-
fering money to roommates) by consulting API
documentation and executing API calls through
generated code. Unlike other API usage datasets,
AppWorld provides a high-quality execution en-
vironment that simulates 9 everyday apps (Ama-
zon, Spotify, Venmo, Gmail, Todoist, SimpleNote,
Splitwise, FileSystem, Phone, and ApiDocs). The
environment includes totally 457 APIs and features
interactions with over 100 simulated users.
To benchmark the agent model performance, Ap-
pWorld provides a suite of 750 natural, diverse,
and challenging tasks, divided into four splits:
Train (105), Dev (60), Test-Normal (168), and Test-
Challenge (417). The Test-Challenge set not only
contains more test examples but also requires APIs
from applications (Amazon and Gmail) that are
absent from the Train, Dev, and Test-Normal sets.
This design specifically evaluates the models’ abil-
ity to generalize to unfamiliar APIs.
For accurate evaluation, each task incorporates a
manually written program that evaluates the final
environment state against predefined criteria, pro-
13

ducing a completion rate (0-1) that serves as our
outcome-based reward. The stage-based tests ac-
commodate multiple solution paths, enabling more
precise reward calculations. Notably, AppWorld
presents a significant challenge even for state-of-
the-art LLMs. According to Trivedi et al. (2024),
even GPT-4O achieves only about 49% success rate
on Test-Normal tasks and approximately 30% on
Test-Challenge tasks.
Furthermore, the 750 tasks comes from 250 task
scenarios, each consisting of three tasks sharing
similar instructions under different simulated users.
The scenario-based structure of AppWorld makes it
well-suited for Sequential Rollout, as tasks within
the same scenario naturally form a task chain.
D
Prompt for Skill Library Agent
Figure 9 illustrates the prompt template used for
our skill library agent. Within the prompt, place-
holders (marked in red and enclosed in brackets)
are designed to be replaced with corresponding
content. The template requires an example task
to serve as an in-context example, while the skill
library section would be replaced with available
function skills. All remaining information is de-
rived directly from the AppWorld dataset’s task
specifications.
E
Training Details of Baseline GRPO
We built our training framework based on the verl
repository (Sheng et al., 2024), which uses vLLM
(Kwon et al., 2023) for rollout and FSDP (Zhao
et al., 2023) for gradient update. While our training
configuration largely followed Chen et al. (2025),
there are still some key modifications: we imple-
mented strictly on-policy reinforcement learning
and employed full-parameter fine-tuning instead of
LoRA. The implementation details of the baseline
GRPO used in our paper are shown as follows:
Training Framework. Our baseline GRPO differs
from the original algorithm presented in Section
3.2.1. Here we eliminated the KL penalty and
recomputed the advantage of each group as ˆAi,t =
ri −mean(r) without normalized by the standard
error.
Dataset.
We only applied the difficulty-1 and
difficulty-2 tasks in the Train split of AppWorld
dataset for our baseline training.
Rollout Settings. For each step of training, we per-
formed the rollout process with 1.0 temperature for
36 random sampled examples with G = 8 agents
for each group, resulting in totally 288 rollout. Dur-
ing the agents interact with AppWorld environment,
we allowed 40 maximum interaction turns with
a limitation of 1,500 output tokens for each turn.
Due to the GPU memory limitation, we set the con-
text limitation as 28,048 during rollout. For each
task, once its trajectory length tokens exceed the
limitation during interaction, the rollout will be
stopped and marked as completed. Besides, we ob-
served that the code execution outputs returned by
the AppWorld environment may be extremely long
(e.g., print all examples in the list). Thus, we ap-
plied truncation for returned environment outputs
exceeding 12,000 characters and append prompt
“Observation truncated for display.” afterwards as
a truncation notification. After each environment
output, we also appended a reminder about the task
related information before agents generate the next
step. Last but not least, to improve the rollout effi-
ciency, we make an early stop for the entire rollout
process when at least 25 interaction steps for un-
finished rollout, at least 6 rollouts for each task
and 90% of the total number of rollouts have been
collected.
Training Settings. We performed the whole RL
training process on 4xNVIDIA H100 8-GPU nodes.
Due to the long-horizon trajectories, we utilized
the ulysses sequence parallel (Jacobs et al., 2023),
allocating each example on 4 GPUs. We kept the
mini batch size the same as the 288 batch size of
rollout. A constant learning rate of 1e-6 and clip the
gradient norm to 1 were applied for policy gradient
update.
F
Expert Experience Dataset Generation
To collect the expert experience dataset for SFT,
we implemented a rejection sampling process un-
der our skill library agent with the advanced model
Claude Sonnet 3.5 V2 as the expert. Specifically,
we conducted rejection sampling on the training set
using the expert model with temperatures ranging
from 0.05 to 1.0, with increments of 0.05 across
20 steps. The AppWorld dataset comprises 30 dis-
tinct scenarios, and we sequentially deployed the
skill library agent through all three tasks within
each scenario, allowing skills generated in previ-
ous tasks to be directly utilized for subsequent tasks
within the same scenario. When processing each
task, we implemented a maximum retry limit of 10
attempts, terminating sampling within the whole
scenario when this limit is reached. Finally, we
14

retained only those scenarios where either all three
tasks or at least the first two tasks are successfully
completed, as failures in the second task typically
indicate potential issues with the skill generation
process. This process finally yielded 1,129 valid
examples.
Using these collected examples as an expert
experience dataset, we employed Llama-Factory
(Zheng et al., 2024c) to perform full parameter
fine-tuning with 4xNVIDIA H100 8-GPU nodes.
During fine-tuning, since all trajectories in the ex-
pert experience dataset consist of multiple turn in-
teractions, we did gradient update exclusively on
the agent responses with prompt and environment
outputs masked. The model was trained with a
batch size of 128 and employed a learning rate of
1e-6, using a cosine scheduling strategy with 0.1
warmup ratio. Due to Llama-Factory’s limitations
in sequence parallel, we set the maximum token
length to 12,500, and any examples exceeding this
limit were excluded from the dataset.
G
Training Details of SAGE
To ensure a fair comparison with the baseline
GRPO method, we maintained consistency in most
training parameters. However, the introduction of
the Sequential Rollout process necessitated certain
modifications. Below, we detail the specific adjust-
ments made to our training configuration.
Training Framework. Refer to Section 3.2 for
SAGE framework used for training.
Dataset. While we continued to utilize difficulty-1
and difficulty-2 tasks from the Train split of Ap-
pWorld as our training dataset, we implemented
a revised sampling strategy to accommodate the
Sequential Rollout process. We adopt a scenario-
based sampling approach to construct the required
task chains. Specifically, AppWorld tasks are inher-
ently organized into scenarios, with each scenario
comprising three distinct tasks. Our sampling pro-
cess consisted of two steps: we first selected a
certain number of task scenarios, and then within
each selected scenario, we sampled two tasks to
form a task chain.
Rollout Settings. Because the Sequential Roll-
out process requires iterative interactions within
the task chain, the rollout completion time approx-
imately doubles compared to the baseline if we
maintain the same total number of rollouts. To ac-
celerate the training process, we required a larger
number of total rollouts. For each step of training,
we decided to use all scenarios in the Train split of
AppWorld with difficulty-1 and difficulty-2 tasks,
which only contains 24 scenarios. Sampling two
task examples from those scenarios resulted in 48
tasks. Under the same agent number G = 8 for
each group, we finally obtained 384 rollouts for
each step.
Training Settings. The only change during train-
ing was the mini batch size for policy gradient up-
date. Here we aligned it to the batch size of rollout,
which is 384.
Training Details. We present the training curve
with average training reward per step in Figure 5.
During training, we saved model checkpoints ev-
ery 5 steps and evaluated their performance on
the Dev set. The checkpoint achieving the high-
est combined TGC and SGC scores on the Dev
set was selected as our final model. Evaluation
curve showing the TGC and SGC scores on the
Dev set is illustrated in Figure 6. The figure clearly
demonstrates that the model achieves optimal per-
formance in both TGC and SGC metrics at step 75.
Thus, we selected the model checkpoint at step 75
as our final agent model.
Figure 5: Training curve of SAGE.
Figure 6: SGC and TGC scores on Dev set for each 5
training steps.
15

H
Task Execution Examples with
Different Models
This section presents several real task execution
examples on AppWorld, comparing agent models
from the baseline GRPO and each stage of our
approach. These examples demonstrate the advan-
tages of the skill library agent and the improve-
ments in skill library usage achieved by SAGE.
Due to the extensive length of the trajectories, all
examples are presented in a summarized format.
For each interaction turn, we represent the agent’s
action using an emoji accompanied with a brief
description. Figure 7 provides explanations for the
meaning of each emoji.
Figure 7: Action Explanations. Code execution failures
encompass various issues including unsuccessful API
calls, errors in skill generation, and improper skill us-
age. Anti-patterns primarily refer to the key actions that
ultimately lead to task failures.
To clearly demonstrate the skill generation and
usage process, we present two task execution exam-
ples for each agent model under the same scenario.
Examples of the baseline GRPO are shown in Fig-
ure 10. The results for the Skill Library Agent, SFT,
and SAGE stages of our approach are presented in
Figures 11, 12, and 13 respectively.
Analyzing the task execution examples across
different stages of our approach reveals several
key observations. The Skill Library Agent, before
training, demonstrates poor performance in task
execution with the skill library. It often requires
multiple attempts to define a executable function,
and even then, errors may still occur. Additionally,
it tends to simulate data for task processing and
exhibits unexpected behaviors such as repetitive
generation.
After SFT, the agent model shows significantly
reduced interaction steps and fewer errors in skill
generation and usage. However, while these pat-
terns learned from expert experience data mini-
mize basic errors, the SFT model still struggles to
achieve successful task completion.
In comparison to the baseline GRPO, agent
model trained by SAGE substantially improves task
efficiency by eliminating the need for step-by-step
API calls and reducing redundant actions in similar
tasks.
I
Retrieval Method Ablation Study
In this section, we introduce each retrieval method
presented in Table 3 and provide more analysis for
the results.
I.1
Details of Retrieval Methods
Same Scenario. The Same Scenario method serves
as our paper’s default evaluation setting, effectively
utilizing the scenario labels provided in the dataset.
Under this approach, we construct a task chain
comprising three tasks within each scenario, com-
bined with a skill library. The agent performs these
tasks sequentially, with skills generated from the
first two examples being accumulated in the skill
library. This accumulated knowledge is then made
available for the subsequent two examples. Impor-
tantly, each skill library is constrained to its specific
task scenario.
Query N-gram. The core concept of this retrieval
method is to leverage skills generated from tasks
with similar queries (Xu et al., 2025). Under this
approach, each query is associated with its own
skill library, which can be directly inherited once
being retrieved. For simplicity, we initially im-
plement a model-free retrieval approach based on
2-gram Jaccard Similarity to identify the most sim-
ilar query. To ensure retrieval quality, we establish
a threshold of 0.5 for the Jaccard Similarity score;
any retrieved queries falling below this threshold
are discarded.
Query Embedding. This retrieval method shares
the same fundamental principle as Query N-gram,
but employs a more advanced text-embedding
model to compute embedding similarity for query
retrieval. Specifically, we utilize the all-MiniLM-
L6-v2 model (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) for
computing query embeddings with a threshold of
0.65 for the cosine similarity.
Skill Embedding. Skill Embedding retrieves rele-
vant skills from the skill library for each task query
using a standard retrieval model. Each newly gener-
ated skill is encoded into embeddings and indexed
in the skill library for future retrieval purposes.
We employ Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B (Zhang et al.,
2025) as our retrieval model and keep the top 5
retrieved skills for usage. This model differs from
the general text-embedding model used for Query
Embedding because it is specifically trained for
document retrieval, where we treat skills as docu-
16

ments and task instructions as queries.
I.2
Further Analysis
Among the three retrieval methods studied in our
ablation study, Query N-gram achieves perfor-
mance most similar to the ideal Same Scenario case.
This is because tasks under the same scenario in Ap-
pWorld share the same query structure. Some tasks
within the same scenario even use identical query
under different simulated users. Queries within the
same scenario naturally share high similarity un-
der N-gram metric. With a proper threshold, the
skill library can be effectively constrained to skills
within the same scenario.
Query Embedding shows slightly lower perfor-
mance in TGC and SGC but higher efficiency with
fewer Avg. Steps and Tokens. Since text embed-
ding models primarily focus on semantic meaning
rather than structural patterns, and queries with
different structures can convey similar semantic
meanings, it is challenging for Query Embedding
restricting queries to a single scenario. On the other
hand, with Query Embedding, most initial exam-
ples within each task scenario can retrieve similar
queries from other scenarios. While this broader
skill usage leads to fewer interaction steps and to-
kens, it doesn’t necessarily improve accuracy due
to difficult cross-scenario skill adaptation.
The Skill Embedding method demonstrates
lower performance compared to other approaches.
This may be attributed to the inherent difficulty in
retrieving useful skill functions based on queries,
as it requires understanding tool usage rather than
just text relevance. Future work could explore the
development of skill/tool-specific retrievers to en-
hance skill library agent performance.
J
Reward Design Ablation Study
This section supplements the reward design abla-
tion study by providing detailed descriptions of
alternative reward designs and additional analysis
of skill library usage.
J.1
Details of Reward Designs
Outcome-based Reward. Outcome-based Reward
design solely relies on the task completion rate as
the reward. In this case, skill learning is driven
exclusively by Sequential Rollout.
Formally, let r1, r2 ∈[0, 1] denote the verifi-
able task completion rate of the task chain (q1, q2)
collected from Sequential Rollout. The Outcome-
based Rewards can be directly formulated as R1
O =
r1 and R2
O = r2. Similar to the Skill-integrated
Reward design, we impose a -1.0 penalty reward
specifically on responses where the agent provides
no code and terminates the task.
Chain-based Reward. Chain-based Reward de-
sign adds a bonus reward of 1.0 when all tasks
within the task chain are successfully completed,
rather than rewarding the skill generation and usage
throughout the execution. This design aims to test
the necessity of tracking precise skill usage during
the rollout process.
Formally, let r1, r2 ∈[0, 1] denote the verifiable
outcome-based rewards of the task chain (q1, q2)
collected from Sequential Rollout. We can formu-
late the Chain-based Rewards R1
C and R2
C as:
(
R1
C = r1 + 1[r1 = 1] ∗1[r2 = 1]
R2
C = r2 + 1[r1 = 1] ∗1[r2 = 1]
where indicator 1[r = 1] represents whether the
outcome-based reward equals 1. Similar to the
Skill-integrated Reward design, we impose a -1.0
penalty reward specifically on responses where the
agent provides no code and terminates the task.
J.2
Skill Library Usage Analysis
Figure 8: Analysis of skill usage patterns across differ-
ent reward designs. Performance metrics are shown as
ratios relative to Skill-integrated Reward design, with
numerical values annotated.
To better illustrate the advantages of Skill-
integrated Reward design, we conducted a detailed
skill library usage analysis similar to Section 4.3
for agent models trained with different reward de-
signs. Figure 8 summarizes the relative perfor-
mance changes when comparing alternative reward
designs to our Skill-integrated Reward. The results
reveal that while the agent model trained with Skill-
integrated Reward exhibits significantly more skill
usage behaviors (Skill Usage Rate, Skill Library
Size and Used Skill Num), all three reward designs
maintain similar Success Skill Usage Rate. This
17

indicates that our reward design substantially en-
hances skill usage frequency, but successful skill
application appears to be a general behavior achiev-
able across different reward designs. Furthermore,
the smaller Skill Library sizes and fewer Used Skill
Nums in both Outcome-based and Chain-based Re-
wards explain their higher Avg. Steps but lower
Avg. Tokens compared to Skill-integrated Reward.
This pattern emerges because while skill usage typ-
ically reduces interaction steps, the generation of
skill functions generally requires more tokens. In-
terestingly, the Chain-based Reward shows notably
lower skill usage behaviors compared to even the
Outcome-based Reward. This phenomenon might
be attributed to the early training stages where, de-
spite successful task completion in the task chain,
skill usage rates remain low. Consequently, the
additional reward added in Chain-based Reward
may inadvertently reinforce behavior patterns that
exclude skill usage.
K
RL Initialization Methods
This section details various initialization methods
before implementing SAGE.
Base Model. In this approach, we directly apply
the base model, Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct, to the RL
process without any additional initialization.
Self Distillation. Like SFT initialization, Self Dis-
tillation employs supervised fine-tuning. However,
instead of using Claude to generate the expert expe-
rience dataset, it utilizes the base model (Qwen2.5-
32B-Instruct) for data generation.
RL Warm-Up. This method initializes SAGE
through a preliminary RL process. It employs base-
line GRPO with the skill library agent prompt, but
without actual skill library involvement, to famil-
iarize the model with the agent format before im-
plementing SAGE.
L
SFT Initialized Baseline GRPO
For the SFT initialized baseline GRPO, we used
the same SFT model checkpoint as in SAGE. Un-
like the original baseline GRPO settings described
in Appendix E, this SFT-initialized version utilizes
the skill library agent framework without engag-
ing the skill library, rather than using the original
ReAct framework. Specifically, we employed the
skill library agent prompt illustrated in Figure 9 to
guide the rollout process, wherein the model first
generates a function and then executes it to process
the task. Since the baseline GRPO operates without
the skill library, we applied an empty skill library to
the prompt placeholder for each task during rollout.
The comparative results among this SFT initialized
baseline GRPO, the original baseline GRPO, and
SAGE are presented in Table 7. To align with the
training process, only SAGE in Table 7 performs
the evaluation with skill library involved.
From the table, we observe that SFT may not
benefit the baseline training, resulting in even
worse performance than the original baseline. On
the other hand, SFT initialized baseline GRPO
demonstrates lower average generated tokens. This
phenomenon may be attributed to the agent model
remaining constrained by the initial patterns ac-
quired through SFT.
Table 7:
Performance of SFT Initialized Baseline
GRPO.
Method
Test Normal
TGC
SGC
Avg. Steps
Avg. Tokens
GRPO
69.2 ± 2.7
51.8 ± 5.8
16.4 ± 0.2
3,613 ± 200
SFT Initialized GRPO
66.1 ± 1.3
51.2 ± 0.8
12.8 ± 0.1
1,284 ± 18
SAGE
72.0 ± 1.5
60.7 ± 1.5
12.1 ± 0.2
1,475 ± 127
18
