Megatron-LM: Training Multi-Billion Parameter Language Models Using
Model Parallelism
Mohammad Shoeybi 1 2 Mostofa Patwary 1 2 Raul Puri 1 2 Patrick LeGresley 2 Jared Casper 2
Bryan Catanzaro 2
Abstract
Recent work in language modeling demonstrates
that training large transformer models advances
the state of the art in Natural Language Processing
applications. However, very large models can be
quite difﬁcult to train due to memory constraints.
In this work, we present our techniques for train-
ing very large transformer models and implement
a simple, efﬁcient intra-layer model parallel ap-
proach that enables training transformer models
with billions of parameters. Our approach does
not require a new compiler or library changes, is
orthogonal and complimentary to pipeline model
parallelism, and can be fully implemented with
the insertion of a few communication operations
in native PyTorch. We illustrate this approach
by converging transformer based models up to
8.3 billion parameters using 512 GPUs. We sus-
tain 15.1 PetaFLOPs across the entire applica-
tion with 76% scaling efﬁciency when compared
to a strong single GPU baseline that sustains 39
TeraFLOPs, which is 30% of peak FLOPs. To
demonstrate that large language models can fur-
ther advance the state of the art (SOTA), we train
an 8.3 billion parameter transformer language
model similar to GPT-2 and a 3.9 billion parame-
ter model similar to BERT. We show that careful
attention to the placement of layer normalization
in BERT-like models is critical to achieving in-
creased performance as the model size grows. Us-
ing the GPT-2 model we achieve SOTA results
on the WikiText103 (10.8 compared to SOTA per-
plexity of 15.8) and LAMBADA (66.5% com-
pared to SOTA accuracy of 63.2%) datasets. Our
BERT model achieves SOTA results on the RACE
dataset (90.9% compared to SOTA accuracy of
89.4%).
1Equal contribution 2NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Mohammad
Shoeybi <mshoeybi@nvidia.com>.
1. Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is advancing quickly in
part due to an increase in available compute and dataset size.
The abundance of compute and data enables training increas-
ingly larger language models via unsupervised pretraining
(Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019). Empirical evi-
dence indicates that larger language models are dramatically
more useful for NLP tasks such as article completion, ques-
tion answering, and natural language inference (Lan et al.,
2019; Raffel et al., 2019). By ﬁnetuning these pretrained
language models on downstream natural language tasks,
one can achieve state of the art results as shown in recent
work (Devlin et al., 2018; Peters et al., 2018; Howard &
Ruder, 2018; Radford et al., 2018; 2017; Ramachandran
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2019b; Dai et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019; Liu et al., 2019a; Lan et al., 2019).
As these models become larger, they exceed the memory
limit of modern processors, and require additional memory
management techniques such as activation checkpointing
(Chen et al., 2016). Widely used optimization algorithms
such as ADAM require additional memory per parameter to
store momentum and other optimizer state, which reduces
the size of models that can be effectively trained. Several
approaches to model parallelism overcome this limit by
partitioning the model such that the weights and their asso-
ciated optimizer state do not need to reside concurrently on
the processor. For example, GPipe (Huang et al., 2018) and
Mesh-Tensorﬂow (Shazeer et al., 2018) provide frameworks
for model parallelism of different kinds. However, they
require rewriting the model, and rely on custom compilers
and frameworks that are still under development.
In this work, we implement a simple and efﬁcient model
parallel approach using intra-layer model-parallelism. We
exploit the inherent structure in transformer based language
models to make a simple model-parallel implementation that
trains efﬁciently in PyTorch, with no custom C++ code or
compiler required. This approach is orthogonal to pipeline-
based model parallelism as advocated by approaches such
as GPipe (Huang et al., 2018).
To demonstrate the scalability of our approach, we establish
arXiv:1909.08053v4  [cs.CL]  13 Mar 2020

Megatron-LM: Training Multi-Billion Parameter Language Models Using Model Parallelism
Figure 1. Model (blue) and model+data (green) parallel FLOPS
as a function of number of GPUs. Model parallel (blue): up to
8-way model parallel weak scaling with approximatel