Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ALFWORLD: ALIGNING TEXT AND EMBODIED
ENVIRONMENTS FOR INTERACTIVE LEARNING
Mohit Shridhar†
Xingdi Yuan♡
Marc-Alexandre Côté♡
Yonatan Bisk‡
Adam Trischler♡
Matthew Hausknecht♣
†University of Washington
♡Microsoft Research, Montréal
‡Carnegie Mellon University
♣Microsoft Research
ALFWorld.github.io
ABSTRACT
Given a simple request like Put a washed apple in the kitchen fridge, humans can
reason in purely abstract terms by imagining action sequences and scoring their
likelihood of success, prototypicality, and efﬁciency, all without moving a muscle.
Once we see the kitchen in question, we can update our abstract plans to ﬁt the
scene. Embodied agents require the same abilities, but existing work does not yet
provide the infrastructure necessary for both reasoning abstractly and executing
concretely. We address this limitation by introducing ALFWorld, a simulator that
enables agents to learn abstract, text-based policies in TextWorld (Côté et al., 2018)
and then execute goals from the ALFRED benchmark (Shridhar et al., 2020) in a
rich visual environment. ALFWorld enables the creation of a new BUTLER agent
whose abstract knowledge, learned in TextWorld, corresponds directly to concrete,
visually grounded actions. In turn, as we demonstrate empirically, this fosters
better agent generalization than training only in the visually grounded environment.
BUTLER’s simple, modular design factors the problem to allow researchers to
focus on models for improving every piece of the pipeline (language understanding,
planning, navigation, and visual scene understanding).
1
INTRODUCTION
TextWorld
Embodied
Welcome!
You are in the middle of the room. 
Looking around you, you see 
a diningtable, a stove, 
a microwave, and a cabinet. 
Your task is to: 
Put a pan on the diningtable. 
> goto the cabinet
You arrive at the cabinet. 
The cabinet is closed.
> open the cabinet
The cabinet is empty.
> goto the stove
You arrive at the stove. Near the 
stove, you see a pan, a pot, 
a bread loaf, a lettuce, 
and a winebottle.
> take the pan from the stove
You take the pan from the stove.
> goto the diningtable
You arrive at the diningtable.
> put the pan on the diningtable
 
You put the pan on the 
diningtable.
  
Figure 1: ALFWorld: Interactive aligned text and
embodied worlds. An example with high-level text
actions (left) and low-level physical actions (right).
Consider helping a friend prepare dinner in an
unfamiliar house: when your friend asks you
to clean and slice an apple for an appetizer,
how would you approach the task? Intuitively,
one could reason abstractly: (1) ﬁnd an apple
(2) wash the apple in the sink (3) put the clean
apple on the cutting board (4) ﬁnd a knife
(5) use the knife to slice the apple (6) put the
slices in a bowl. Even in an unfamiliar setting,
abstract reasoning can help accomplish the
goal by leveraging semantic priors. Priors like
locations of objects – apples are commonly
found in the kitchen along with implements
for cleaning and slicing, object affordances
– a sink is useful for washing an apple unlike
a refrigerator, pre-conditions – better to wash
an apple before slicing it, rather than the con-
verse. We hypothesize that, learning to solve
tasks using abstract language, unconstrained
by the particulars of the physical world, en-
ables agents to complete embodied tasks in
novel environments by leveraging the kinds
of semantic priors that are exposed by abstrac-
tion and interaction.
1
arXiv:2010.03768v2  [cs.CL]  14 Mar 2021

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
To test this hypothesis, we have created the novel ALFWorld framework, the ﬁrst interactive, parallel
environment that aligns text descriptions and commands with physically embodied robotic simulation.
We build ALFWorld by extending two prior works: TextWorld (Côté et al., 2018) - an engine for
interactive text-based games, and ALFRED (Shridhar et al., 2020) - a large scale dataset for vision-
language instruction following in embodied environments. ALFWorld provides two views of the
same underlying world and two modes by which to interact with it: TextWorld, an abstract, text-based
environment, generates textual observations of the world and responds to high-level text actions;
ALFRED, the embodied simulator, renders the world in high-dimensional images and responds to
low-level physical actions as from a robot (Figure 1).1 Unlike prior work on instruction following
(MacMahon et al., 2006; Anderson et 