Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
SELF-CONSISTENCY IMPROVES CHAIN OF THOUGHT
REASONING IN LANGUAGE MODELS
Xuezhi Wang†‡
Jason Wei†
Dale Schuurmans†
Quoc Le†
Ed H. Chi†
Sharan Narang†
Aakanksha Chowdhery†
Denny Zhou†§
†Google Research, Brain Team
‡xuezhiw@google.com, §dennyzhou@google.com
ABSTRACT
Chain-of-thought prompting combined with pre-trained large language models has
achieved encouraging results on complex reasoning tasks. In this paper, we propose
a new decoding strategy, self-consistency, to replace the naive greedy decoding
used in chain-of-thought prompting. It ﬁrst samples a diverse set of reasoning paths
instead of only taking the greedy one, and then selects the most consistent answer
by marginalizing out the sampled reasoning paths. Self-consistency leverages the
intuition that a complex reasoning problem typically admits multiple different ways
of thinking leading to its unique correct answer. Our extensive empirical evaluation
shows that self-consistency boosts the performance of chain-of-thought prompting
with a striking margin on a range of popular arithmetic and commonsense reasoning
benchmarks, including GSM8K (+17.9%), SVAMP (+11.0%), AQuA (+12.2%),
StrategyQA (+6.4%) and ARC-challenge (+3.9%).
1
INTRODUCTION
Although language models have demonstrated remarkable success across a range of NLP tasks, their
ability to demonstrate reasoning is often seen as a limitation, which cannot be overcome solely by
increasing model scale (Rae et al., 2021; BIG-bench collaboration, 2021, inter alia). In an effort
to address this shortcoming, Wei et al. (2022) have proposed chain-of-thought prompting, where
a language model is prompted to generate a series of short sentences that mimic the reasoning
process a person might employ in solving a task. For example, given the question “If there are 3
cars in the parking lot and 2 more cars arrive, how many cars are in the parking lot?”, instead
of directly responding with “5”, a language model would be prompted to respond with the entire
chain-of-thought: “There are 3 cars in the parking lot already. 2 more arrive. Now there are 3 +
2 = 5 cars. The answer is 5.”. It has been observed that chain-of-thought prompting signiﬁcantly
improves model performance across a variety of multi-step reasoning tasks (Wei et al., 2022).
In this paper, we introduce a novel decoding strategy called self-consistency to replace the greedy
decoding strategy used in chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022), that further improves
language models’ reasoning performance by a signiﬁcant margin. Self-consistency leverages the
intuition that complex reasoning tasks typically admit multiple reasoning paths that reach a correct
answer (Stanovich & West, 2000). The more that deliberate thinking and analysis is required for a
problem (Evans, 2010), the greater the diversity of reasoning paths that can recover the answer.
Figure 1 illustrates the self-consistency method with an example. We ﬁrst prompt the language model
with chain-of-thought prompting, then instead of greedily decoding the optimal reasoning path, we
propose a “sample-and-marginalize” decoding procedure: we ﬁrst sample from the language model’s
decoder to generate a diverse set of reasoning paths; each reasoning path might lead to a different
ﬁnal answer, so we determine the optimal answer by marginalizing out the sampled reasoning paths
to ﬁnd the most consistent answer in the ﬁnal answer set. Such an approach is analogous to the
human experience that if multiple different ways of thinking lead to the same answer, one has greater
conﬁdence that the ﬁnal answer is correct. Compared to other decoding methods, self-consistency
avoids the repetitiveness and local-optimality that plague greedy decoding, while mitigating the
stochasticity of a single sampled generation.
1
arXiv:2203.11171v4  [cs.CL]  7 Mar 2023

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Language 
model
Q: If there are 3 cars in the parking 
lot and 2 more cars arrive, how many 
cars are in the parking lot?
A: There are 3 cars in the parking lot 
already. 2 more arrive. Now there are 
3 + 2 = 5 cars. The answer is 5.
…
Q: Janet’s ducks lay 16 eggs per day. 
She eats three for breakfast every 
morning and bakes muffins for her 
friends every day with four. She sells 
the remainder for $2 per egg. How 
much does she make every day?
A:
She has 16 - 3 - 4 = 9 eggs 
left. So she makes $2 * 9 = 
$18 per day. 
Sample a diverse set of 
reasoning paths
She eats 3 