Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
ARE HUMAN-LEVEL
PROMPT ENGINEERS
Yongchao Zhou1,2,∗, Andrei Ioan Muresanu2,3,∗, Ziwen Han1,2,∗, Keiran Paster1,2,
Silviu Pitis1,2, Harris Chan1,2, Jimmy Ba1,2
1University of Toronto
2Vector Institute
3University of Waterloo
∗Equal contribution
{yczhou,hanziwen,keirp,spitis,hchan,jba}@cs.toronto.edu
{andrei.muresanu}@uwaterloo.ca
ABSTRACT
By conditioning on natural language instructions, large language models (LLMs) have
displayed impressive capabilities as general-purpose computers. However, task performance
depends signiﬁcantly on the quality of the prompt used to steer the model, and most effective
prompts have been handcrafted by humans. Inspired by classical program synthesis and
the human approach to prompt engineering, we propose Automatic Prompt Engineer1
(APE) for automatic instruction generation and selection. In our method, we treat the
instruction as the “program,” optimized by searching over a pool of instruction candidates
proposed by an LLM in order to maximize a chosen score function. To evaluate the
quality of the selected instruction, we evaluate the zero-shot performance of another LLM
following the selected instruction. Extensive experiments show that our automatically
generated instructions outperform the prior LLM baseline by a large margin and achieve
better or comparable performance to the instructions generated by human annotators on
24/24 Instruction Induction tasks and 17/21 curated BIG-Bench tasks. We conduct extensive
qualitative and quantitative analyses to explore the performance of APE. We show that
APE-engineered prompts are able to improve few-shot learning performance (by simply
prepending them to standard in-context learning prompts), ﬁnd better zero-shot chain-of-
thought prompts, as well as steer models toward truthfulness and/or informativeness. 2
1
INTRODUCTION
The combination of scale and attention-based architectures has resulted in language models possessing
an unprecedented level of generality (Kaplan et al., 2020; Vaswani et al., 2017). These so-called
“large language models” (LLMs) have shown remarkable, often superhuman, capabilities across a
diverse range of tasks, including both zero-shot and few-shot setups (Brown et al., 2020; Srivastava
et al., 2022). With generality, however, there comes a question of control: how can we make LLMs
do what we want them to do?
To answer this question and steer LLMs toward desired behaviors, recent work has considered
ﬁne-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ziegler et al., 2019), in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020), and
several forms of prompt generation (Gao, 2021), including both differentiable tuning of soft prompts
(Qin & Eisner, 2021; Lester et al., 2021) and natural language prompt engineering (Reynolds &
McDonell, 2021). The latter is of particular interest, as it provides a natural interface for humans to
communicate with machines and may be of great relevance not only to LLMs but to other generalist
models such as prompted image synthesizers (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022), for which
public interest in prompt design and generation has also emerged (see Appendix A for examples).
Behind this interest is the fact that plain language prompts do not always produce the desired results,
even when those results are possible to produce with alternative instructions. Thus, human users must
experiment with a wide range of prompts to elicit desired behaviors, as they have little knowledge of
how compatible instructions are with a particular model. We can understand this by viewing LLMs
as black-box computers that execute programs speciﬁed by natural language instructions: while they
1We deﬁne “prompt engineering” as optimizing the language in a prompt in order to elicit the best possible
performance. Notably, this does not include prompts that chain multiple LLM queries together or give the LLM
access to external tools.
2 Our code is available at https://github.com/keirp/automatic_prompt_engineer.
1
arXiv:2211.01910v2  [cs.LG]  10 Mar 2023

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Professor Smith was given the
following instructions: <INSERT>
Here are the Professor’s responses: 
# Demostration Start
Input: prove		 	Output: disprove
Input: on 		
	Output: off
...
# Demostration End	
LLMs as Inference Models
Instruction: write the antonym of the
word. 
Input: direct 	 Output: indirect
write the opposite of the word given.
give the antonym of the word provided.
.