Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools
Timo Schick
Jane Dwivedi-Yu
Roberto Dessì†
Roberta Raileanu
Maria Lomeli
Luke Zettlemoyer
Nicola Cancedda
Thomas Scialom
Meta AI Research †Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Abstract
Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable
abilities to solve new tasks from just a few
examples or textual instructions, especially at
scale. They also, paradoxically, struggle with
basic functionality, such as arithmetic or fac-
tual lookup, where much simpler and smaller
models excel.
In this paper, we show that
LMs can teach themselves to use external tools
via simple APIs and achieve the best of both
worlds.
We introduce Toolformer, a model
trained to decide which APIs to call, when to
call them, what arguments to pass, and how to
best incorporate the results into future token
prediction. This is done in a self-supervised
way, requiring nothing more than a handful of
demonstrations for each API. We incorporate
a range of tools, including a calculator, a Q&A
system, a search engine, a translation system,
and a calendar. Toolformer achieves substan-
tially improved zero-shot performance across
a variety of downstream tasks, often competi-
tive with much larger models, without sacriﬁc-
ing its core language modeling abilities.
1
Introduction
Large language models achieve impressive zero-
and few-shot results on a variety of natural lan-
guage processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowd-
hery et al., 2022, i.a.) and show several emergent
capabilities (Wei et al., 2022). However, all of
these models have several inherent limitations that
can at best be partially addressed by further scal-
ing. These limitations include an inability to access
up-to-date information on recent events (Komeili
et al., 2022) and the related tendency to hallucinate
facts (Maynez et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2022), difﬁcul-
ties in understanding low-resource languages (Lin
et al., 2021), a lack of mathematical skills to per-
form precise calculations (Patel et al., 2021) and an
unawareness of the progression of time (Dhingra
et al., 2022).
The New England Journal of Medicine is a registered 
trademark of [QA(“Who is the publisher of The New 
England Journal of Medicine?”) → Massachusetts 
Medical Society] the MMS.
Out of 1400 participants, 400 (or [Calculator(400 / 1400) 
→ 0.29] 29%) passed the test. 
The name derives from “la tortuga”, the Spanish word for 
[MT(“tortuga”) → turtle] turtle.
The Brown Act is California’s law [WikiSearch(“Brown 
Act”) → The Ralph M. Brown Act is an act of the 
California State Legislature that guarantees the public's 
right to attend and participate in meetings of local 
legislative bodies.] that requires legislative bodies, like 
city councils, to hold their meetings open to the public.
Figure 1: Exemplary predictions of Toolformer. The
model autonomously decides to call different APIs
(from top to bottom: a question answering system,
a calculator, a machine translation system, and a
Wikipedia search engine) to obtain information that is
useful for completing a piece of text.
A simple way to overcome these limitations of
today’s language models is to give them the abil-
ity to use external tools such as search engines,
calculators, or calendars. However, existing ap-
proaches either rely on large amounts of human
annotations (Komeili et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al.,
2022) or limit tool use to task-speciﬁc settings only
(e.g., Gao et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022), hinder-
ing a more widespread adoption of tool use in LMs.
Therefore, we propose Toolformer, a model that
learns to use tools in a novel way, which fulﬁlls the
following desiderata:
• The use of tools should be learned in a
self-supervised way without requiring large
amounts of human annotations. This is impor-
arXiv:2302.04761v1  [cs.CL]  9 Feb 2023

x1:i-1  = Pittsburgh is 
            also known as
  xi:n = the Steel City
x* = Pittsburgh is 
        also known as
        [QA(What …? 
        → Steel City)] 
        the Steel City.
ci
1 = What other name is 
         Pittsburgh known by?
ci
2 = Which country is
         Pittsburgh in?
ri
1 = Steel City 
ri
2 = United States
Li(ci
1 → Steel City)
 < min(Li(ci
1 → ε), Li(ε))
Li(ci
2 → United States)
 > min(Li(ci
2 → ε), Li(ε))
1 
Sample API Calls
2 
Execute API Calls
3 
Filter API Calls
LM Dataset
LM Dataset 
with API Calls
Figure 2: Key steps in our approach, illustrated for a question answering tool: Given an input text x, we ﬁrst
sample a position i and corresponding AP