Cost-Effective Hyperparameter Optimization for Large Language Model
Generation Inference
Chi Wang 1 Susan Xueqing Liu 2 Ahmed H. Awadallah 1
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have sparked
significant interest in their generative capabili-
ties, leading to the development of various com-
mercial applications.
The high cost of using
the models drives application builders to max-
imize the value of generation under a limited
inference budget. This paper presents a study
of optimizing inference hyperparameters such
as the number of responses, temperature and
max tokens, which significantly affects the util-
ity/cost of text generation. We design a framework
named EcoOptiGen which leverages economi-
cal hyperparameter optimization and cost-based
pruning. Experiments with the GPT-3.5/GPT-4
models on a variety of tasks verify its effective-
ness. EcoOptiGen is implemented in the ‘auto-
gen’ package of the FLAML library: https:
//aka.ms/autogen.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) like GPT-3.5 and GPT-
4 (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023)
have demonstrated impressive capabilities in a wide range of
generative tasks, including story telling (Lucy and Bamman,
2021; Chen, 2022), code generation (Trummer, 2022; Poe-
sia et al., 2022), math problem solving (Cobbe et al., 2021;
Zong and Krishnamachari, 2022), and many others (Wang
et al., 2022). Even though the LLMs do not always gener-
ate perfect answers, they have initiated a trend of building
powerful user experiences such as coding assistants and
chat-enabled search engines. As the interest of building
LLM-enabled applications keeps growing, the demand for
technologies for getting the best value out of generation
inference will also grow.
The research community has recently studied the effect of
individual hyperparameters on the inference performance,
1Microsoft Research 2Stevens Institute of Techology. Corre-
spondence to: Chi Wang <wang.chi@microsoft.com>.
Copyright 2023 by the author(s).
such as the prompt (Liu et al., 2021; Mishra et al., 2021;
Shieh, 2022) and temperature (Branwen, 2020; Nadeem
et al., 2020). However, little is known about how to op-
timize the different hyperparameters collectively and sys-
tematically. Moreover, the monetary cost is a concern for
most application builders. High costs and implications on
energy consumption and environmental impact (Schwartz
et al., 2020) provide a strong incentive to systematically
optimize the hyperparameters towards maximal utility and
minimal cost.
In this paper, we present the first study on the systematic
hyperparameter optimization for text generation inference
using LLMs. Given the cost concern, we adopt an economi-
cal hyperparameter optimization method (Wang et al., 2021),
and propose a cost-based pruning strategy to improve the
optimization efficiency under budget constraints. We apply
our optimization framework, named EcoOptiGen, to tune
multiple hyperparameters jointly, including the number of
responses, max tokens, temperature, probability mass, and
prompts.
To study the effectiveness of EcoOptiGen, we evaluate
it on the following datasets: APPS (Hendrycks et al.,
2021a), HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) (for code gener-
ation); MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b) (for math problem
solving); and XSum (Narayan et al., 2018) (for text summa-
rization). On all the four datasets, we observe that EcoOpti-
Gen can find higher quality hyperparameter settings than
the default settings suggested by a recent LLM benchmark
HELM (Liang et al., 2022) or simple modifications for the
same budget. Our pruning technique is shown to be effec-
tive in increasing the tuning performance significantly. We
further find that the holistic hyperparameter optimization
can mitigate idiosyncrasies to prevent suboptimal results.
2. Background
2.1. Text Generation with LLMs
The Input and Output of LLM Text Generation
Fig-
ure 1 shows one example of the input prompt to LLM.
Upon receiving the prompt, LLM performs inference to
generate one or more output responses. The input prompt
can further include multiple examples to demonstrate what
arXiv:2303.04673v2  [cs.CL]  8 Aug 2023

Cost-Effective Hyperparameter Optimization for Large Language Model Generation Inference
Figure 1. A code generation example using GPT-4, and a few examples of hyperparameters users can set for the inference, such as prompt,
temperature, and max tokens.
kind of responses are desirable. The output can be con-
sumed or validated by an applic