SELF-REFINE:
Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback
Aman Madaan1, Niket Tandon2, Prakhar Gupta1, Skyler Hallinan3, Luyu Gao1,
Sarah Wiegreffe2, Uri Alon1, Nouha Dziri2, Shrimai Prabhumoye4, Yiming Yang1,
Shashank Gupta2, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder5, Katherine Hermann6,
Sean Welleck2,3, Amir Yazdanbakhsh6, Peter Clark2
1Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3University of Washington
4NVIDIA
5UC San Diego 6Google Research, Brain Team
amadaan@cs.cmu.edu, nikett@allenai.org
Abstract
Like humans, large language models (LLMs) do not always generate the best
output on their first try. Motivated by how humans refine their written text, we
introduce SELF-REFINE, an approach for improving initial outputs from LLMs
through iterative feedback and refinement. The main idea is to generate an initial
output using an LLM; then, the same LLM provides feedback for its output and
uses it to refine itself, iteratively. SELF-REFINE does not require any supervised
training data, additional training, or reinforcement learning, and instead uses a
single LLM as the generator, refiner and the feedback provider. We evaluate
SELF-REFINE across 7 diverse tasks, ranging from dialog response generation
to mathematical reasoning, using state-of-the-art (GPT-3.5 and GPT-4) LLMs.
Across all evaluated tasks, outputs generated with SELF-REFINE are preferred by
humans and automatic metrics over those generated with the same LLM using
conventional one-step generation, improving by ∼20% absolute on average in task
performance. Our work demonstrates that even state-of-the-art LLMs like GPT-4
can be further improved at test-time using our simple, standalone approach.1.
1
Introduction
Although large language models (LLMs) can generate coherent outputs, they often fall short in
addressing intricate requirements. This mostly includes tasks with multifaceted objectives, such
as dialogue response generation, or tasks with hard-to-define goals, such as enhancing program
readability. In these scenarios, modern LLMs may produce an intelligible initial output, yet may
benefit from further iterative refinement—i.e., iteratively mapping a candidate output to an improved
one—to ensure that the desired quality is achieved. Iterative refinement typically involves training
a refinement model that relies on domain-specific data (e.g., Reid and Neubig (2022); Schick et al.
(2022a); Welleck et al. (2022)). Other approaches that rely on external supervision or reward models
require large training sets or expensive human annotations (Madaan et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022),
which may not always be feasible to obtain. These limitations underscore the need for an effective
refinement approach that can be applied to various tasks without requiring extensive supervision.
Iterative self-refinement is a fundamental characteristic of human problem-solving (Simon, 1962;
Flower and Hayes, 1981; Amabile, 1983). Iterative self-refinement is a process that involves creating
an initial draft and subsequently refining it based on self-provided feedback. For example, when
1Code and data at https://selfrefine.info/
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2303.17651v2  [cs.CL]  25 May 2023

Refine
Feedback
Use M to get feedback on its own output
Input
Use M to refine its previous output, given its feedback
Model M
1
2
0
Figure 1: Given an input ( 0⃝), SELF-REFINE starts by generating an output and passing it back to the
same model M to get feedback ( 1⃝). The feedback is passed back to M, which refines the previously
generated output ( 2⃝). Steps ( 1⃝) and ( 2⃝) iterate until a stopping condition is met. SELF-REFINE is
instantiated with a language model such as GPT-3.5 and does not involve human assistance.
drafting an email to request a document from a colleague, an individual may initially write a direct
request such as “Send me the data ASAP”. Upon reflection, however, the writer recognizes the
potential impoliteness of the phrasing and revises it to “Hi Ashley, could you please send me the data
at your earliest convenience?". When writing code, a programmer may implement an initial “quick
and dirty” implementation, and then, upon reflection, refactor their code to a solution that is more
efficient and readable. In this paper, we demonstrate that LLMs can provide iterative self-refinement
without additional training, leading to higher-quality outputs on a wide range of tasks.
We present SELF-REFINE: an iterative self-refinement al