TEACHING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS TO SELF-
DEBUG
Xinyun Chen1
Maxwell Lin2
Nathanael Schärli1
Denny Zhou1
1 Google DeepMind
2 UC Berkeley
{xinyunchen,schaerli,dennyzhou}@google.com, mxlin@berkeley.edu
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance on code
generation. However, for complex programming tasks, generating the correct
solution in one go becomes challenging, thus some prior works have designed
program repair approaches to improve code generation performance. In this work,
we propose SELF-DEBUGGING, which teaches a large language model to debug
its predicted program via few-shot demonstrations. In particular, we demonstrate
that SELF-DEBUGGING can teach the large language model to perform rubber
duck debugging; i.e., without any human feedback on the code correctness or error
messages, the model is able to identify its mistakes by investigating the execution
results and explaining the generated code in natural language. SELF-DEBUGGING
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on several code generation benchmarks,
including the Spider dataset for text-to-SQL generation, TransCoder for C++-
to-Python translation, and MBPP for text-to-Python generation. On the Spider
benchmark where there are no unit tests to verify the correctness of predictions,
SELF-DEBUGGING with code explanation consistently improves the baseline by
2 −3%, and improves the prediction accuracy on problems of the hardest level by
9%. On TransCoder and MBPP where unit tests are available, SELF-DEBUGGING
improves the baseline accuracy by up to 12%. Meanwhile, by leveraging feedback
messages and reusing failed predictions, SELF-DEBUGGING notably improves
sample efficiency, and can match or outperform baseline models that generate more
than 10× candidate programs.
1
INTRODUCTION
Code generation has been a long-standing challenge with a variety of applications, such as code
synthesis from natural languages (Yu et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022), programming by examples (Devlin et al., 2017; Bunel et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019), and
code translation (Roziere et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2018). In particular, recent large language models
have demonstrated a significant leap in improvement over prior deep neural networks (Chen et al.,
2021a; Nijkamp et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022). However, for many programming
tasks, generating correct code with a single attempt is challenging. Inspired by observations that
correct code is much more likely to be predicted when multiple programs are sampled from the
model (Chen et al., 2021a; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), one line of work has designed
reranking techniques to select the best candidate from multiple samples, which typically requires tens
of samples to start with (Shi et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022).
Intuitively, even for human programmers, there is no guarantee that the code written on the first
try is always accurate. Instead of completely discarding the incorrect code, humans typically look
into the code and investigate execution results, then make changes to resolve the implementation
errors. Therefore, prior works propose deep learning techniques to repair the predicted code, which
demonstrate notable performance gains on various coding tasks (Gupta et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2018; Fu et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2023a). However, these approaches require additional training for
the code repair model. While some recent works show that large language models have potential
for generating feedback messages to critique and refine their outputs for some natural language and
reasoning domains (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023b; Kim et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022), prior
1
arXiv:2304.05128v2  [cs.CL]  5 Oct 2023

Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug
works suggest that such large language models are not yet capable of correcting code when lacking
external feedback, such as unit tests or human instructions (Chen et al., 2023a).
In this work, we propose SELF-DEBUGGING, where we teach the large language model to debug
its own predicted code via few-shot prompting. Without any additional model training, SELF-
DEBUGGING instructs the model to execute the code, then generate a feedback message based on
the code and its execution result. Different from prior works on utilizing human feedback for code
repair, where the feedback message explains the code errors and how to fi