Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
CRITIC: LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS CAN SELF-
CORRECT WITH TOOL-INTERACTIVE CRITIQUING
Zhibin Gou12∗, Zhihong Shao12∗, Yeyun Gong2, Yelong Shen3,
Yujiu Yang1†, Nan Duan2, Weizhu Chen3
1Tsinghua University
2Microsoft Research Asia, 3Microsoft Azure AI
{gzb22,szh19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
{yegong, yeshe, nanduan, wzchen}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Recent developments in large language models (LLMs) have been impressive.
However, these models sometimes show inconsistencies and problematic behavior,
such as hallucinating facts, generating flawed code, or creating offensive and toxic
content. Unlike these models, humans typically utilize external tools to cross-check
and refine their initial content, like using a search engine for fact-checking, or a code
interpreter for debugging. Inspired by this observation, we introduce a framework
called CRITIC that allows LLMs, which are essentially “black boxes” to validate
and progressively amend their own outputs in a manner similar to human interaction
with tools. More specifically, starting with an initial output, CRITIC interacts with
appropriate tools to evaluate certain aspects of the text, and then revises the output
based on the feedback obtained during this validation process. Comprehensive
evaluations involving free-form question answering, mathematical program syn-
thesis, and toxicity reduction demonstrate that CRITIC consistently enhances the
performance of LLMs. Meanwhile, our research highlights the crucial importance
of external feedback in promoting the ongoing self-improvement of LLMs1.
1
INTRODUCTION
The remarkable progress of large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT, has been amply
demonstrated across an array of language tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). Their
potential to augment human intellect continues to burgeon (Saunders et al., 2022). However, these
models are not without their shortcomings. They occasionally exhibit undesirable behaviors, such as
hallucination (generating inaccurate or non-truthful responses), faulty code, or even toxic content
(Maynez et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Gehman et al., 2020). Such inconsistent behavior hampers
the trust in these models and poses hurdles to their real-world applications (OpenAI, 2023).
Traditional approaches to mitigate these limitations typically employ additional training, involving be-
havior cloning, reinforcement learning, and self-training (Saunders et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020;
Jeon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022b). However, these methods are constrained by the requirement of
large-scale human annotation or data construction, which is often resource-intensive and challenging
to obtain. To address these challenges, we present Self-Correcting with Tool-Interactive Critiquing
(CRITIC), a unified framework that empowers black-box LLMs to verify and rectify their own
output through human-like interaction with external tools. Drawing inspiration from human cognition
(Greenfield, 1991; Vaesen, 2012) and critical thinking (Marcus, 1988; Ennis, 1991), CRITIC offers a
versatile framework that supports precise, interpretable verification and correction of generated text.
As depicted in Figure 1, CRITIC interacts with external tools like search engines and code interpreters
to verify the desired aspects of an initial output and subsequently amends the output based on
the critiques from the verification. This verify-then-correct process can be repeated to ensure
∗Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
†Corresponding author.
1Code released at https://github.com/microsoft/ProphetNet/tree/master/CRITIC.
1
arXiv:2305.11738v4  [cs.CL]  21 Feb 2024

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
External Tools
Text APIs
Wikipedia
Search Engine
Code Interpreter
Calculator
Input
Output
Verify
Critiques
Correct
CRITIC
Knowledge Base
Black-box
LLM
Figure 1: The CRITIC framework consists of two steps: (1) verifying the output by interacting with
external tools to generate critiques and (2) correcting the output based on the received critiques. We
can iterative such verify-then-correct process to enable continuous improvements.
constant output enhancement. Contrary to methods that rely on expensive annotations or task-specific
training, CRITIC utilizes in-context learning with tool interaction to proficiently identify and rectify
unsatisfactory behaviors using the LLM itself. This unique approach makes CRITIC both p