Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AS TOOL MAKERS
Tianle Cai1,2∗
Xuezhi Wang1
Tengyu Ma1,3†
Xinyun Chen1
Denny Zhou1
1Google Deepmind
2Princeton University
3Stanford University
ABSTRACT
Recent research has highlighted the potential of large language models (LLMs)
to improve their problem-solving capabilities with the aid of suitable external
tools. In our work, we further advance this concept by introducing a closed-
loop framework, referred to as LLMs As Tool Makers (LATM), where LLMs
create their own reusable tools for problem-solving. Our approach consists of two
phases: 1) tool making: an LLM acts as the tool maker that crafts tools for a set
of tasks, where a tool is implemented as a Python utility function. 2) tool using:
another LLM acts as the tool user, which applies the tool built by the tool maker
for problem-solving. The tool user can be either the same or a different LLM
from the tool maker. On the problem-solving server side, tool-making enables
continual tool generation and caching as new requests emerge. This framework
enables subsequent requests to access cached tools via their corresponding APIs,
enhancing the efficiency of task resolution. Beyond enabling LLMs to create their
own tools, our framework also uncovers intriguing opportunities to optimize the
serving cost of LLMs: Recognizing that tool-making requires more sophisticated
capabilities, we assign this task to a powerful, albeit resource-intensive, model.
Conversely, the simpler tool-using phase is delegated to a lightweight model. This
strategic division of labor allows the once-off cost of tool-making to be spread
over multiple instances of tool-using, significantly reducing average costs while
maintaining strong performance. Furthermore, our method offers a functional
cache through the caching and reuse of tools, which stores the functionality of
a class of requests instead of the natural language responses from LLMs, thus
extending the applicability of the conventional cache mechanism. We evaluate
our approach across various complex reasoning tasks, including Big-Bench tasks.
With GPT-4 as the tool maker and GPT-3.5 as the tool user, LATM demonstrates
performance equivalent to using GPT-4 for both roles, but with a significantly
reduced inference cost. The codebase can be found in https://github.com/
ctlllll/LLM-ToolMaker.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated outstanding capabilities across a broad array of
NLP tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022;
OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023) and have even shown promising signs of achieving certain aspects
of artificial general intelligence (Bubeck et al., 2023; Kosinski, 2023). Moreover, analogous to the
evolution of human intelligence, recent research has unveiled the potential of augmenting LLMs with
external tools, thereby significantly enhancing their problem-solving capacities and efficiencies (Yao
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Parisi et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023).
However, the applicability of these tool-using methods is largely contingent on the availability of
suitable tools. According to the lessons learned from the evolutionary milestones of humans, a
crucial turning point was that humans got the ability to fabricate their own tools to address emerging
challenges. Inspired by the importance of tool-making for humans, in this work, we embark on an
initial exploration to apply this evolutionary concept to the realm of LLMs. We propose a closed-loop
framework, which we term as LLMs As Tool Makers (LATM), enables LLMs to generate their own
reusable tools to tackle new tasks. Our approach comprises two key stages: 1) tool making: an LLM,
∗Work done as a Student Researcher at Google Deepmind.
†Work done as a Visiting Researcher at Google Deepmind.
1
arXiv:2305.17126v2  [cs.LG]  11 Mar 2024

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 1: The closed-loop framework of LATM. In situations with numerous problem-solving
requests, directly utilizing a powerful LLM to solve all the instances can result in high costs. On the
other hand, lightweight models are cost-effective but usually struggle with complex tasks. LATM
leverages the strengths of both models by employing a powerful model as the tool maker to generate
reusable tools (implemented as Python functions) for tasks observed in the requests and pass the
tool to a cost-effective tool user model for solving similar instances 