Retentive Network: A Successor to Transformer
for Large Language Models
Yutao Sun∗†‡
Li Dong∗†
Shaohan Huang† Shuming Ma†
Yuqing Xia† Jilong Xue† Jianyong Wang‡ Furu Wei†⋄
† Microsoft Research
‡ Tsinghua University
https://aka.ms/GeneralAI
Abstract
In this work, we propose Retentive Network (RETNET) as a foundation archi-
tecture for large language models, simultaneously achieving training parallelism,
low-cost inference, and good performance. We theoretically derive the connection
between recurrence and attention. Then we propose the retention mechanism for
sequence modeling, which supports three computation paradigms, i.e., parallel,
recurrent, and chunkwise recurrent. Specifically, the parallel representation allows
for training parallelism. The recurrent representation enables low-cost O(1) infer-
ence, which improves decoding throughput, latency, and GPU memory without
sacrificing performance. The chunkwise recurrent representation facilitates effi-
cient long-sequence modeling with linear complexity, where each chunk is encoded
parallelly while recurrently summarizing the chunks. Experimental results on
language modeling show that RETNET achieves favorable scaling results, parallel
training, low-cost deployment, and efficient inference. The intriguing properties
make RETNET a strong successor to Transformer for large language models. Code
will be available at https://aka.ms/retnet.
0
20
40
0
150
300
0
150
300
GPU Memory↓
(GB)
Throughput↑
(wps)
Latency↓
(ms)
3.4X
15.6X
8.4X
Inference Cost
Scaling Curve
RetNet
Transformer
1
3
7
LM Perplexity
Model Size (B)
Figure 1: Retentive network (RetNet) achieves low-cost inference (i.e., GPU memory, throughput,
and latency), training parallelism, and favorable scaling curves compared with Transformer. Results
of inference cost are reported with 8k as input length. Figure 6 shows more results on different
sequence lengths.
∗Equal contribution. ⋄Corresponding author.
arXiv:2307.08621v4  [cs.CL]  9 Aug 2023

“
The only way to discover the limits of the possible is to go beyond them into the impossible.
Arthur C. Clarke”
1
Introduction
Low-Cost
Inference
Transformer
RetNet
Figure 2: RetNet makes the “impossible triangle”
possible, which achieves training parallelism, good
performance, and low inference cost simultane-
ously.
Transformer [VSP+17] has become the de
facto architecture for large language mod-
els [BMR+20], which was initially proposed
to overcome the sequential training issue of
recurrent models [HS97]. However, training
parallelism of Transformers is at the cost of in-
efficient inference, because of the O(N) com-
plexity per step and memory-bound key-value
cache [Sha19], which renders Transformers un-
friendly to deployment. The growing sequence
length increases GPU memory consumption as
well as latency and reduces inference speed.
Numerous efforts have continued to develop the
next-generation architecture, aiming at retain-
ing training parallelism and competitive perfor-
mance as Transformers while having efficient
O(1) inference. It is challenging to achieve the
above goals simultaneously, i.e., the so-called
“impossible triangle” as shown in Figure 2.
There have been three main strands of research.
First, linearized attention [KVPF20] approximates standard attention scores exp(q · k) with kernels
ϕ(q) · ϕ(k), so that autoregressive inference can be rewritten in a recurrent form. However, the
modeling capability and performance are worse than Transformers, which hinders the method’s popu-
larity. The second strand returns to recurrent models for efficient inference while sacrificing training
parallelism. As a remedy, element-wise operators [PAA+23] are used for acceleration, however,
representation capacity and performance are harmed. The third line of research explores replacing
attention with other mechanisms, such as S4 [GGR21], and its variants [DFS+22, PMN+23]. None
of the previous work can break through the impossible triangle, resulting in no clear winner compared
with Transformers.
In this work, we propose retentive networks (RetNet), achieving low-cost inference, efficient long-
sequence modeling, Transformer-comparable performance, and parallel model training simultane-
ously. Specifically, we introduce a multi-scale retention mechanism to substitute multi-head attention,
which has three computation paradigms, i.e., parallel, recurrent, and chunkwise recurrent repre-
sentations. First, the parallel representation empowers training parallelism to util