Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
SKELETON-OF-THOUGHT:
PROMPTING LLMS
FOR
EFFICIENT PARALLEL GENERATION
Xuefei Ning1∗
foxdoraame@gmail.com
Zinan Lin2∗
linzinan1995@gmail.com
Zixuan Zhou14∗
zhouzx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Zifu Wang3
zifu.wang@kuleuven.be
Huazhong Yang1
yanghz@tsinghua.edu.cn
Yu Wang1
yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
1 Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2 Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, USA
3 ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
4 Infinigence-AI
Website: https://sites.google.com/view/sot-llm
Code: https://github.com/imagination-research/sot
ABSTRACT
This work aims at decreasing the end-to-end generation latency of large language
models (LLMs). One of the major causes of the high generation latency is the
sequential decoding approach adopted by almost all state-of-the-art LLMs. In
this work, motivated by the thinking and writing process of humans, we propose
Skeleton-of-Thought (SoT), which first guides LLMs to generate the skeleton of
the answer, and then conducts parallel API calls or batched decoding to complete
the contents of each skeleton point in parallel. Not only does SoT provide consid-
erable speed-ups across 12 LLMs, but it can also potentially improve the answer
quality on several question categories. SoT is an initial attempt at data-centric op-
timization for inference efficiency, and showcases the potential of eliciting high-
quality answers by explicitly planning the answer structure in language.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023a; Du et al., 2022; OpenAI,
2023; Zheng et al., 2023) have shown exceptional performance in natural language processing and
chatbot systems. However, the inference process of the state-of-the-art LLMs is slow, hindering their
interactive use. For example, it takes 22 seconds for Claude (Anthropic, 2023) (accessed through
Slack API) and 43 seconds for Vicuna-33B V1.3 (a 33B LLaMA-based model, running locally on
one NVIDIA A100 GPU) to answer the question in Fig. 1.
We conclude three major causes of LLMs’ slow inference: (1) A large model size requires a large
amount of memory, memory access, and computation. For example, the FP16 weights of 175B GPT-
3 take 350GB memory, which means at least 5×80GB A100 GPUs are needed to keep the model
in GPU memory. Even with enough GPUs, the heavy memory access and computation slow down
the inference. (2) The attention operation in the prevailing transformer architecture is I/O bounded
and has a quadratic memory and computation complexity in sequence length. (3) The sequential
decoding approach in inference generates tokens one by one. This approach introduces a significant
inference latency since the generation of tokens cannot be parallelized. There is a bunch of literature
addressing the first two axes: large model size (Xiao et al., 2022; Frantar et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023;
Sheng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021) and attention operation (Kitaev et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020;
∗Equal contribution.
1
arXiv:2307.15337v3  [cs.CL]  2 Mar 2024

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Answer
1. Active listening involves fully 
concentrating on …
2. Identify issues. Look into the root 
causes of …
3. Compromise. Look for a middle 
ground …
What are the most effective 
strategies for conflict 
resolution in the workplace?
Question
Skeleton-of-Thought 
Decoding
Generates answers
sequentially ➔Slower
Normal 
Decoding
1. Active listening
2. Identify issues
3. Compromise
Generates answers
in parallel ➔Faster
(1) Skeleton
stage
(2) Point-
expanding
stage
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Speed-up
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Net win rates
Vicuna-13B V1.3
StableVicuna-13B
UltraLM-13B
Vicuna-33B V1.3
LLaMA2-Chat-7B
LLaMA2-Chat-13B
Vicuna-7B V1.3
ChatGPT-3.5
Claude
Vicuna-7B V1.1
OpenChat-13B
GPT-4
Baseline
Figure 1: Left: An illustration of Skeleton-of-Thought (SoT). Instead of producing answers se-
quentially, SoT produces different parts of answers in parallel. In more detail, given the question,
SoT first prompts the LLM to give out the skeleton, then conducts batched decoding or parallel API
calls to expand multiple points in parallel, and finally aggregates the outputs to get the final answer.
Right: The net win rates and speed-ups of SoT with router (SoT-R) compared to normal generation
on Vicuna-80. The net win rate is the difference between the fraction of questions that SoT-R has
better and worse answers than normal generation. The speed-up is the