ExpeL: LLM Agents Are Experiential Learners
Andrew Zhao,♠Daniel Huang, ♣Quentin Xu, ♣Matthieu Lin, ♣Yong-Jin Liu, ♣Gao Huang ♠*
♠Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
♣Department of Computer Science, BNRist, Tsinghua University
{zqc21,huang-jy22,xgd22,lyh21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{liuyongjin,gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
The recent surge in research interest in applying large language models (LLMs) to decision-making tasks has flourished
by leveraging the extensive world knowledge embedded in LLMs. While there is a growing demand to tailor LLMs for
custom decision-making tasks, finetuning them for specific tasks is resource-intensive and may diminish the model’s
generalization capabilities. Moreover, state-of-the-art language models like GPT-4 and Claude are primarily accessible
through API calls, with their parametric weights remaining proprietary and unavailable to the public. This scenario em-
phasizes the growing need for new methodologies that allow learning from agent experiences without requiring paramet-
ric updates. To address these problems, we introduce the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent. Our agent autonomously
gathers experiences and extracts knowledge using natural language from a collection of training tasks. At inference, the
agent recalls its extracted insights and past experiences to make informed decisions. Our empirical results highlight the
robust learning efficacy of the ExpeL agent, indicating a consistent enhancement in its performance as it accumulates
experiences. We further explore the emerging capabilities and transfer learning potential of the ExpeL agent through
qualitative observations and additional experiments.1
A computer program is said to learn from experience
E with respect to some class of tasks T and
performance measure P, if its performance at tasks in
T, as measured by P, improves with experience E.
Tom Mitchell
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1Visit https://andrewzh112.github.io/expel for project page, and https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/ExpeL for code.
arXiv:2308.10144v3  [cs.LG]  20 Dec 2024

1
Introduction
Machine learning research has long been captivated by the
potential of autonomous agents and their capabilities. In re-
cent times, incorporating large language models into these
agents (Wang et al. 2023b; Xi et al. 2023) has unveiled
a broad spectrum of applications, even extending beyond
academia (Yang et al. 2023a; Nakajima 2023; Significant-
Gravitas 2023). One of the significant advantages of LLMs
lies in their world knowledge, allowing them to be inherently
versatile across various scenarios (Zhao et al. 2023b).
On the one hand, previous works investigated finetun-
ing LLMs with a large number of environment interactions
(Yao et al. 2023c) or with a large amount of human-labeled
datasets (Nakano et al. 2021; Shaw et al. 2023). This class
of methods incurs high computational costs and needs ac-
cess to the LLM’s parametric weights. Furthermore, fine-
tuning an LLM restricts its functionalities and can hurt its
generalization abilities (Du et al. 2022). On the other hand,
prompting methods can augment an LLM with better se-
quential decision-making planning abilities with only a few
in-context examples (Hao et al. 2023; Lin et al. 2023b; Sun
et al. 2023). However, since current LLMs are bounded by
context window size (Tworkowski et al. 2023), these agents
have no recollections of what they have seen, and therefore
no learning can be done outside of a few demonstrations. So,
how can we strike a balance between these paradigms?
We present the Experiential Learning (ExpeL) agent as a
solution. Our agent autonomously gathers experiences from
a collection of training tasks through trial and error. From
these experiences, it derives natural language insights and
employs its own successful experiences as in-context exam-
ples during test time. Our agent’s learning process is analo-
gous to a student studying for an exam and then taking it on
a single attempt, reflecting many real-world situations. Un-
like self-improvement methods like Reflexion (Shinn et al.
2023), our approach emphasizes the importance of retaining
experiences across multiple tasks to enhance agent perfor-
mance. Moreover, ExpeL learns without parameter updates,
making it compatible with powerful closed-source models
like GPT-4 or Claude. Lastly, the experience-gathering step
do