CHATEVAL: TOWARDS BETTER LLM-BASED EVALUA-
TORS THROUGH MULTI-AGENT DEBATE
Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Zhiyuan Liu∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Tsinghua University
zorowin123@gmail.com
Jie Fu, Wei Xue
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Shanghang Zhang
Peking University
ABSTRACT
Text evaluation has historically posed significant challenges, often demanding
substantial labor and time cost. With the emergence of large language models
(LLMs), researchers have explored LLMs’ potential as alternatives for human
evaluation. While these single-agent-based approaches show promise, experi-
mental results suggest that further advancements are needed to bridge the gap
between their current effectiveness and human-level evaluation quality. Recog-
nizing that best practices of human evaluation processes often involve multiple
human annotators collaborating in the evaluation, we resort to a multi-agent debate
framework, moving beyond single-agent prompting strategies. The multi-agent-
based approach enables a group of LLMs to synergize with an array of intelli-
gent counterparts, harnessing their distinct capabilities and expertise to enhance
efficiency and effectiveness in handling intricate tasks. In this paper, we con-
struct a multi-agent referee team called ChatEval to autonomously discuss and
evaluate the quality of generated responses from different models on open-ended
questions and traditional natural language generation (NLG) tasks. We derive
insights and lessons from practical scenarios where humans instigate group dis-
cussions for brainstorming and propose different communication strategies within
ChatEval. Our experiments on two benchmark tasks illustrate that ChatEval deliv-
ers superior accuracy and correlation in alignment with human assessment. Fur-
thermore, we find that the diverse role prompts (different personas) are essen-
tial in the multi-agent debate process; that is, utilizing the same role description
in the prompt can lead to a degradation in performance. Our qualitative analy-
sis also shows that ChatEval transcends mere textual scoring, offering a human-
mimicking evaluation process for reliable assessments. Our code is available at
https://github.com/chanchimin/ChatEval.
1
INTRODUCTION
Evaluating the quality of text generated by language models or written by humans has long been a
challenging endeavor, consistently garnering substantial attention (Celikyilmaz et al., 2020). Tra-
ditional methodologies predominantly rely on human annotation of texts (Callison-Burch, 2009),
an approach considered overly demanding in terms of time and cost. Automatic evaluation metrics
based on n-grams, such as Rouge (Lin, 2004), BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), and METEOR (Baner-
jee & Lavie, 2005), have been proposed to tackle this issue (Kondrak, 2005). However, these
methods have been shown to exhibit a relatively weak correlation with human judgments, partic-
ularly in the context of tasks involving open-ended generation or requiring domain-specific exper-
tise (Novikova et al., 2017).
Recent advancements in the field of natural language processing have led to the emergence of
billion-parameter scale LLMs, such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). These LLMs have demon-
∗Corresponding author. Email: liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn
1
arXiv:2308.07201v1  [cs.CL]  14 Aug 2023

strated remarkable capabilities across diverse downstream tasks, presenting new opportunities for
text quality evaluation using such models. Moreover, various training paradigms have been pro-
posed to endow LLMs with the ability to accomplish tasks in a zero-shot manner and better adhere
to human-provided instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021). These
advancements facilitate the prompting of LLMs to evaluate generated text, effectively simulating
human evaluators in the assessment process.
In view of the impressive text understanding and instruction-following capabilities of recent LLMs,
a body of literature (Liu et al., 2023b; Chiang & Lee, 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023) has
adopted LLM as an evaluator to assess the quality of responses to open-ended questions or tradi-
tional NLG tasks, including dialogue response generation and summarization. This methodology is
dubbed LLM-as-a-judge (Zheng et al., 2023). Findings from these researches indicate that LLM can
mimic human behavior and provide evaluations that correspond with human judgments, revealing a
potentially sc