Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
CRAFT: CUSTOMIZING LLMS BY CREATING
AND RETRIEVING FROM SPECIALIZED TOOLSETS
Lifan Yuan∗, Yangyi Chen∗, Xingyao Wang, Yi R. Fung, Hao Peng, Heng Ji
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{lievanyuan173}@gmail.com
{yangyic3,xingyao6,yifung2,haopeng,hengji}@illinois.edu
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) are often augmented with tools to solve complex
tasks. By generating code snippets and executing them through task-specific Ap-
plication Programming Interfaces (APIs), they can offload certain functions to
dedicated external modules, such as image encoding and performing calculations.
However, most existing approaches to augment LLMs with tools are constrained
by general-purpose APIs and lack the flexibility for tailoring them to specific tasks.
In this work, we present CRAFT, a general tool creation and retrieval framework
for LLMs. It creates toolsets specifically curated for the tasks and equips LLMs
with a component that retrieves tools from these sets to enhance their capability to
solve complex tasks. For each task, we collect specific code solutions by prompting
GPT-4 to solve the training examples. Following a validation step ensuring the
correctness, these solutions are abstracted into code snippets to enhance reusabil-
ity, and deduplicated for higher quality. At inference time, the language model
retrieves snippets from the toolsets and then executes them or generates the output
conditioning on the retrieved snippets. Our method is designed to be flexible and
offers a plug-and-play approach to adapt off-the-shelf LLMs to unseen domains
and modalities, without any finetuning. Experiments on vision-language, tabular
processing, and mathematical reasoning tasks show that our approach achieves
substantial improvements compared to strong baselines. In addition, our in-depth
analysis reveals that: (1) consistent performance improvement can be achieved by
scaling up the number of tools and the capability of the backbone models; (2) each
component of our approach contributes to the performance gains; (3) the created
tools are well-structured and reliable with low complexity and atomicity. 1
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as transformative tools in AI, exhibiting capabilities in
complex problem-solving, including reasoning, planning, and producing creative outputs (Brown et al.,
2020; Touvron et al., 2023b;a; Yuan et al., 2023). Recent evidence has shown that LLMs can dynam-
ically interact with the environment through external tools, which grants them access to information
beyond their pretrained parameters (Qin et al., 2023a; Mialon et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023). For
example, these models can generate code snippets and call APIs provided by visual tools like image
encoding models, to solve problems that involve images or videos (Wu et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023).
Success has been achieved by integrating LLMs with large-scale, general-purpose tool collec-
tions (Qin et al., 2023b; Tang et al., 2023; Sur´ıs et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2022a;
Gao et al., 2023b; Patil et al., 2023). However, adapting LLMs to many domains and evolving
applications involves working with more specialized APIs tailored to address specific challenges,
which are often inadequately represented in general-purpose toolsets. In response, this work proposes
to integrate LLMs with highly customizable toolsets that are curated for specific problems of interest.
∗Equal contribution. The first author conducts this research during an internship at UIUC.
1The code is available at https://github.com/lifan-yuan/CRAFT.
1
arXiv:2309.17428v2  [cs.CL]  13 Mar 2024

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Question: The movie critic 
liked to count the number 
of actors in each movie he 
saw. What is the smallest 
number of actors?
CRAFT (Ours)
LLM: To solve the query, the helpful tools 
might be [api_name ... ], and the 
corresponding docstring can be [...]
def find_smallest_number_of_actors(df):
"""..."""
return find_lowest_value_in_stem_leaf(df, "Stem", "Leaf")
df = pd.DataFrame({'Stem': [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7],
'Leaf': [[2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9], [0, 2, 4, 4, 6, 6, 6, 7], 
             [2, 3, 5], [], [5, 6, 6], [0, 4, 4, 9]]})
find_smallest_number_of_actors(df) # Output: 22
LLM: [Use retrieved tool from created tool base for problem-solving]
def calculate_total_items_for_groups(...)
def calculate_items_from_ratio(...)
def calculate_difference_between_rows(...)
def