LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AS OPTIMIZERS
Chengrun Yang*
Xuezhi Wang
Yifeng Lu
Hanxiao Liu
Quoc V. Le
Denny Zhou
Xinyun Chen*
{chengrun, xuezhiw, yifenglu, hanxiaol}@google.com
{qvl, dennyzhou, xinyunchen}@google.com
Google DeepMind
* Equal contribution
ABSTRACT
Optimization is ubiquitous. While derivative-based algorithms have been powerful
tools for various problems, the absence of gradient imposes challenges on many
real-world applications. In this work, we propose Optimization by PROmpting
(OPRO), a simple and effective approach to leverage large language models (LLMs)
as optimizers, where the optimization task is described in natural language. In
each optimization step, the LLM generates new solutions from the prompt that
contains previously generated solutions with their values, then the new solutions are
evaluated and added to the prompt for the next optimization step. We first showcase
OPRO on linear regression and traveling salesman problems, then move on to our
main application in prompt optimization, where the goal is to find instructions
that maximize the task accuracy. With a variety of LLMs, we demonstrate that
the best prompts optimized by OPRO outperform human-designed prompts by
up to 8% on GSM8K, and by up to 50% on Big-Bench Hard tasks. Code at
https://github.com/google-deepmind/opro.
0
50
100
150
# steps
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
training accuracy
GSM8K
(a) GSM8K
0
50
100
150
200
# steps
60.0
80.0
100.0
training accuracy
BBH
movie_recommendation
(b) BBH movie_recommendation
Figure 1: Prompt optimization on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and BBH (Suzgun et al., 2022)
movie_recommendation. The optimization on GSM8K has pre-trained PaLM 2-L as the scorer and
the instruction-tuned PaLM 2-L (denoted PaLM 2-L-IT) as the optimizer; the optimization on
BBH movie_recommendation has text-bison as the scorer and PaLM 2-L-IT as the optimizer.
Each dot is the average accuracy across all (up to 8) generated instructions in the single step, and the
shaded region represents standard deviation. See Section 5 for more details on experimental setup.
Table 1: Top instructions with the highest GSM8K zero-shot test accuracies from prompt optimization
with different optimizer LLMs. All results use the pre-trained PaLM 2-L as the scorer.
Source
Instruction
Acc
Baselines
(Kojima et al., 2022)
Let’s think step by step.
71.8
(Zhou et al., 2022b)
Let’s work this out in a step by step way to be sure we have the right answer.
58.8
(empty string)
34.0
Ours
PaLM 2-L-IT
Take a deep breath and work on this problem step-by-step.
80.2
PaLM 2-L
Break this down.
79.9
gpt-3.5-turbo
A little bit of arithmetic and a logical approach will help us quickly arrive at
the solution to this problem.
78.5
gpt-4
Let’s combine our numerical command and clear thinking to quickly and
accurately decipher the answer.
74.5
1
arXiv:2309.03409v3  [cs.LG]  15 Apr 2024

Large Language Models as Optimizers
1
INTRODUCTION
Optimization is critical for all areas. Many optimization techniques are iterative: the optimization
starts from an initial solution, then iteratively updates the solution to optimize the objective func-
tion (Amari, 1993; Qian, 1999; Kingma & Ba, 2015; Bäck & Schwefel, 1993; Rios & Sahinidis,
2013; Reeves, 1993). The optimization algorithm typically needs to be customized for an individual
task to deal with the specific challenges posed by the decision space and the performance landscape,
especially for derivative-free optimization.
In this work, we propose Optimization by PROmpting (OPRO), a simple and effective approach to
utilize large language models (LLMs) as optimizers. With the advancement of prompting techniques,
LLMs have achieved impressive performance in various domains (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022a; Madaan et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023e).
Their ability to understand natural language lays out a new possibility for optimization: instead of
formally defining the optimization problem and deriving the update step with a programmed solver,
we describe the optimization problem in natural language, then instruct the LLM to iteratively generate
new solutions based on the problem description and the previously found solutions. Optimization
with LLMs enables quick adaptation to different tasks by changing the problem description in the
prompt, and the optimization process can be customized by adding instructions to specify the desired
properties of the solutions.
To demonstrate the poten