Preprint
DSPY:
COMPILING
DECLARATIVE
LANGUAGE
MODEL CALLS INTO SELF-IMPROVING PIPELINES
Omar Khattab,1 Arnav Singhvi,2
Paridhi Maheshwari,4 Zhiyuan Zhang,1
Keshav Santhanam,1 Sri Vardhamanan,6 Saiful Haq,6
Ashutosh Sharma,6 Thomas T. Joshi,7 Hanna Moazam,8
Heather Miller,3,9 Matei Zaharia,2 Christopher Potts1
1Stanford University, 2UC Berkeley, 3Carnegie Mellon University,
4Amazon Alexa AI, 5Dashworks Technologies, Inc.,
6IIT Bombay, 7Calera Capital, 8Microsoft, 9Two Sigma Investments
okhattab@cs.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
The ML community is rapidly exploring techniques for prompting language mod-
els (LMs) and for stacking them into pipelines that solve complex tasks. Un-
fortunately, existing LM pipelines are typically implemented using hard-coded
“prompt templates”, i.e. lengthy strings discovered via trial and error. Toward a
more systematic approach for developing and optimizing LM pipelines, we intro-
duce DSPy, a programming model that abstracts LM pipelines as text transforma-
tion graphs, i.e. imperative computation graphs where LMs are invoked through
declarative modules. DSPy modules are parameterized, meaning they can learn
(by creating and collecting demonstrations) how to apply compositions of prompt-
ing, finetuning, augmentation, and reasoning techniques. We design a compiler
that will optimize any DSPy pipeline to maximize a given metric. We conduct
two case studies, showing that succinct DSPy programs can express and optimize
sophisticated LM pipelines that reason about math word problems, tackle multi-
hop retrieval, answer complex questions, and control agent loops. Within minutes
of compiling, a few lines of DSPy allow GPT-3.5 and llama2-13b-chat to self-
bootstrap pipelines that outperform standard few-shot prompting (generally by
over 25% and 65%, respectively) and pipelines with expert-created demonstra-
tions (by up to 5–46% and 16–40%, respectively). On top of that, DSPy pro-
grams compiled to open and relatively small LMs like 770M-parameter T5 and
llama2-13b-chat are competitive with approaches that rely on expert-written
prompt chains for proprietary GPT-3.5.
DSPy is available at https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy.
1
INTRODUCTION
Language models (LMs) are enabling researchers to build NLP systems at higher levels of abstrac-
tion and with lower data requirements than ever before (Bommasani et al., 2021). This is fueling an
exploding space of “prompting” techniques—and lightweight finetuning techniques—for adapting
LMs to new tasks (Kojima et al., 2022), eliciting systematic reasoning from them (Wei et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022b), and augmenting them with retrieved sources (Guu et al., 2020; Lazaridou et al.,
2022; Khattab et al., 2022) or with tools (Yao et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023). Most of these tech-
niques are explored in isolation, but interest has been growing in building multi-stage pipelines and
agents that decompose complex tasks into more manageable calls to LMs in an effort to improve
performance (Qi et al., 2019; Khattab et al., 2021a; Karpas et al., 2022; Dohan et al., 2022; Khot
et al., 2022; Khattab et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Pourreza & Rafiei, 2023; Shinn et al., 2023).
Unfortunately, LMs are known to be sensitive to how they are prompted for each task, and this is
exacerbated in pipelines where multiple LM calls have to interact effectively. As a result, the LM
1
arXiv:2310.03714v1  [cs.CL]  5 Oct 2023

Preprint
calls in existing LM pipelines and in popular developer frameworks are generally implemented using
hard-coded ‘prompt templates’, that is, long strings of instructions and demonstrations that are hand
crafted through manual trial and error. We argue that this approach, while pervasive, can be brittle
and unscalable—conceptually akin to hand-tuning the weights for a classifier. A given string prompt
might not generalize to different pipelines or across different LMs, data domains, or even inputs.
Toward a more systematic approach to designing AI pipelines, we introduce the DSPy programming
model.1 DSPy pushes building new LM pipelines away from manipulating free-form strings and
closer to programming (composing modular operators to build text transformation graphs) where a
compiler automatically generates optimized LM invocation strategies and prompts from a program.
We draw inspiration from the consensus that emerged around neural network abstractions (Bergstra
et al., 2013), where (1) many general-purpose layers can be modularly composed in any comple