LLMLingua: Compressing Prompts for Accelerated Inference
of Large Language Models
Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, Lili Qiu
Microsoft Corporation
{hjiang, qianhuiwu, cyl, yuqing.yang, liliqiu}@microsoft.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have been ap-
plied in various applications due to their as-
tonishing capabilities. With advancements in
technologies such as chain-of-thought (CoT)
prompting and in-context learning (ICL), the
prompts fed to LLMs are becoming increas-
ingly lengthy, even exceeding tens of thousands
of tokens. To accelerate model inference and
reduce cost, this paper presents LLMLingua,
a coarse-to-fine prompt compression method
that involves a budget controller to maintain
semantic integrity under high compression ra-
tios, a token-level iterative compression algo-
rithm to better model the interdependence be-
tween compressed contents, and an instruc-
tion tuning based method for distribution align-
ment between language models. We conduct
experiments and analysis over four datasets
from different scenarios, i.e., GSM8K, BBH,
ShareGPT, and Arxiv-March23; showing that
the proposed approach yields state-of-the-art
performance and allows for up to 20x compres-
sion with little performance loss.1
1
Introduction
The widespread adoption of ChatGPT has trans-
formed numerous scenarios by harnessing the pow-
erful generalization and reasoning capabilities of
large language models (LLMs). In practical ap-
plications, crafting suitable prompts is crucial
and usually involves techniques such as chain-of-
thought, in-context learning, and retrieving related
documents or historical conversations (Wei et al.,
2022; Chase, 2022). While these methods can
elicit highly effective generations by activating
LLMs’ domain-specific knowledge, they often re-
quire longer prompts. Therefore, striking a balance
between the massive computational demands of
LLMs and the need for longer prompts has become
an urgent issue. Some studies attempt to accelerate
model inference by modifying the parameters of
1Our code is available at https://aka.ms/LLMLingua.
LLMs through quantization (Dettmers et al., 2022;
Xiao et al., 2023), compression (Frantar and Alis-
tarh, 2023), etc. However, these approaches may
be not suitable when the LLMs can be accessed via
APIs only.
Approaches that attempt to reduce the length of
original prompts while preserving essential infor-
mation have emerged lately. These approaches are
grounded in the concept that natural language is
inherently redundant (Shannon, 1951) and thus can
be compressed. Gilbert et al. (2023) also indicate
that LLMs can effectively reconstruct source code
from compressed text descriptions while maintain-
ing a high level of functional accuracy. Therefore,
we follow this line of studies to compress a long
prompt into a shorter one without any gradient flow
through the LLMs to support applications based on
a larger range of LLMs.
In terms of information entropy, tokens with
lower perplexity (PPL) contribute less to the over-
all entropy gains of the language model. In other
words, removing tokens with lower perplexity has
a relatively minor impact on the LLM’s compre-
hension of the context.
Motivated by this, Li
(2023) propose Selective-Context, which first em-
ploys a small language model to compute the self-
information of each lexical unit (such as sentences,
phrases, or tokens) in original prompts, and then
drops the less informative content for prompt com-
pression. However, this method not only ignores
the interdependence between the compressed con-
tents but also neglects the correspondence between
the LLM being targeted and the small language
model used for prompt compression.
This paper proposes LLMLingua, a coarse-
to-fine prompt compression method, to address
the aforementioned issues. Specifically, we first
present a budget controller to dynamically allo-
cate different compression ratios to various com-
ponents in original prompts such as the instruction,
demonstrations, and the question, and meanwhile,
arXiv:2310.05736v2  [cs.CL]  6 Dec 2023

perform coarse-grained, demonstration-level com-
pression to maintain semantic integrity under high
compression ratios. We further introduce a token-
level iterative algorithm for fine-grained prompt
compression. Compared with Selective Context, it
can better preserve the key information within the
prompt by taking into account the conditional de-
pendencies between tokens. Additionally, we pose
the c