AutoMix: Automatically Mixing Language Models
Pranjal Aggarwal♢∗
Aman Madaan♣∗
Ankit Anand ‡
Srividya Pranavi Potharaju †
Swaroop Mishra‡
Pei Zhou△
Aditya Gupta
Dheeraj Rajagopal†
Karthik Kappaganthu†
Yiming Yang♠
Shyam Upadhyay†
Manaal Faruqui†
Mausam♢
♠Carnegie Mellon University
♣xAI
† Google
‡ Google DeepMind
♢IIT Delhi
△University of Southern California
automix-models@googlegroups.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are now available from cloud API providers in
various sizes and configurations. While this diversity offers a broad spectrum
of choices, effectively leveraging the options to optimize computational cost and
performance remains challenging. In this work, we present AutoMix, an approach
that strategically routes queries to larger LMs, based on the approximate correct-
ness of outputs from a smaller LM. Central to AutoMix are two key technical
contributions. First, it has a few-shot self-verification mechanism, which estimates
the reliability of its own outputs without requiring extensive training. Second,
given that self-verification can be noisy, it employs a POMDP based router that
can effectively select an appropriately sized model, based on answer confidence.
Experiments across five language models and five challenging datasets show that
AutoMix consistently surpasses strong baselines, reducing computational cost by
over 50% for comparable performance. 1
1
Introduction
The landscape of Large Language Models (LLMs) is rapidly evolving, with a wide array of models
now available in various sizes, capabilities, and computational requirements [Touvron et al., 2023,
OpenAI, 2023, Jiang et al., 2023a]. While larger models generally exhibit superior performance,
their substantial computational costs render them unaffordable for many simpler tasks. Moreover,
the vast array of available options makes it challenging for end-users to determine the optimal
model configuration for their specific needs. This challenge is further compounded by the intrinsic
complexity and variability of real-world tasks, ranging from simple (e.g., binary classification on
separable data) to complex (e.g., code generation) and potentially unsolvable tasks (e.g., certain
forms of multi-step reasoning). To address these issues and ensure that end-users can obtain the best
performance within their budget constraints, the development of model-switching techniques has
become increasingly important. These techniques involve dispatching queries to models of disparate
sizes and capabilities, allowing for a more efficient allocation of computational resources [Liu et al.,
2020, Zhou et al., 2020, Madaan and Yang, 2022, Geng et al., 2021, Schuster et al., 2022].
Contemporary model-switching strategies often rely on separate routing models trained for a fixed
set of tasks [Chen et al., 2023, Ding et al., 2024]. Moreover, modern LLMs are frequently accessible
only through black-box APIs, restricting direct model optimization due to the unavailability of
fine-tuning capabilities and weight access. This constraint, coupled with the expectation of access
to large amounts of task-specific data, creates a challenge that existing routing approaches fail to
address adequately. In response, we introduce AutoMix, a method that enables users to mix models
∗*Equal Contribution. Work started and partly done during Aman’s internship at Google.
1Code available at github.com/automix-llm/automix
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
arXiv:2310.12963v5  [cs.CL]  19 Jan 2025

Route
LLM
Budget: 
AutoMix
LM1/LLaMA
Generate
LM1 Verifier
Self-Verify
POMDP 
Router
LM2/GPT-4
Hard?
Easy or
Unsolvable?
Budget: 
Accuracy: 
SLM
Accuracy: 
Automix automatically
optimizes cost-performance
tradeoff for users by mixing 
multiple black-box LMs
Figure 1: Representative example for 2 model setup in AutoMix. Instead of relying only on small
model (SLM) with low performance or a large model (LLM) with high cost, AutoMix automatically
mixes multiple black-box language models, based on user desired cost-quality tradeoff. AutoMix
works in a 3-step process: 1.) generation by a small model (LM1), 2.) self-verification of the
generated answer, 3.) using confidence assessments from self-verification to do appropriate routing
to a larger model (LM2). For N-model setup, the process is repeated till the final answer is reported.
of various sizes and capabilities, assuming only access to black-box LLM APIs. As illustrated in
Figure 1, AutoMix consists