Preprint
AGENTTUNING:
ENABLING GENERALIZED AGENT
ABILITIES FOR LLMS
Aohan Zeng‡§∗, Mingdao Liu‡∗, Rui Lu‡∗, Bowen Wang‡, Xiao Liu‡§, Yuxiao Dong‡, Jie Tang‡
‡Tsinghua University
§Zhipu.AI
ABSTRACT
Open large language models (LLMs) with great performance in various tasks have
significantly advanced the development of LLMs. However, they are far inferior to
commercial models such as ChatGPT and GPT-4 when acting as agents to tackle
complex tasks in the real world. These agent tasks employ LLMs as the central
controller responsible for planning, memorization, and tool utilization, necessitat-
ing both fine-grained prompting methods and robust LLMs to achieve satisfactory
performance. Though many prompting methods have been proposed to complete
particular agent tasks, there is lack of research focusing on improving the agent
capabilities of LLMs themselves without compromising their general abilities. In
this work, we present AgentTuning, a simple and general method to enhance the
agent abilities of LLMs while maintaining their general LLM capabilities. We
construct AgentInstruct, a lightweight instruction-tuning dataset containing high-
quality interaction trajectories. We employ a hybrid instruction-tuning strategy
by combining AgentInstruct with open-source instructions from general domains.
AgentTuning is used to instruction-tune the Llama 2 series, resulting in AgentLM.
Our evaluations show that AgentTuning enables LLMs’ agent capabilities without
compromising general abilities. The AgentLM-70B is comparable to GPT-3.5-
turbo on unseen agent tasks, demonstrating generalized agent capabilities. We
open source the AgentInstruct dataset and AgentLM-7B, 13B, and 70B models
at https://github.com/THUDM/AgentTuning, serving open and pow-
erful alternatives to commercial LLMs for agent tasks.
Overall Score
Held-out Tasks
+76%
+57%
+176%
Overall Score
Held-in Tasks
7B
13B
70B
Llama 2 (chat)
GPT-3.5
AgentLM (Ours)
7B
13B
70B
GPT-3.5
GPT-3.5
(a) Overall score in our held-in and held-out tasks.
0
1
2
3
4
AgentBench Overall Score
gpt-4
claude
gpt-3.5-turbo
text-davinci-003
claude-instant
text-davinci-002
text-bison-001
chatglm2
openchat-13b
wizardlm-30b
vicuna-13b
wizardlm-13b
......
wizardcoder-15b
dolly-v2-12b
oasst-sft-4-12b
API-based
LLMs
Open-sourced
LLMs
4.41
2.77
2.55
2.10
1.90
1.46
1.39
1.31
1.15
0.83
0.62
0.59
0.21
0.15
0.07
Avg:2.24
Avg:0.42
(b) Closed & open LLMs on agent tasks (Liu et al., 2023)
Figure 1: (a) AgentLM exhibits superior performance. AgentLM is a series of models fine-tuned
on the foundation of Llama 2 chat. Moreover, its generalization capability on held-out tasks is on
par with GPT-3.5; (b) This figure is directly re-printed from AgentBench (Liu et al., 2023) with
permission. Open LLMs significantly underperforms API-based LLMs.
*Equal contribution. Email: {zah22,liu-md20,lu-r21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
§Work partially done when ML, RL, and BW interned at Zhipu.AI.
1
arXiv:2310.12823v2  [cs.CL]  22 Oct 2023

Preprint
Trajectory 1
Self-
Instruct
Held-in Tasks
Operating
System
Database
Knowledge
Graph
Web
Navigation
House
Holding
Web
Shopping
Instruction
Generation
Task
Derivation
Train set
Trajectory 2
General Instructions
…
Thought: I should 
first list all the 
tables, then …
Action: SHOW TABLES;
…
Action: INSERT INTO … 
Reward: 0.0
…
Observation: …
Thought: …
Action: UPDATE 
students SET grade = 
'PASS' WHERE score > 
60;
Reward: 1.0
More Agent Tasks
(Database) 
Grade students 
over 60 as 
PASS in the 
table.
AgentTuning
AgentInstruct
Science
Experiments
Digital
Card Game
Daily Computer
Tasks
Wiki QA
Web
Interaction
AgentLM
Figure 2: An overview of AgentInstruct and AgentTuning. The construction of AgentInstruct,
consisting of instruction generation, trajectory interaction, and trajectory filter. AgentLM is fine-
tuned using a mixture of AgentInstruct and general-domain instructions.
1
INTRODUCTION
An agent refers to an entity capable of perceiving its environment, making decisions, and taking
actions (Maes, 1994; Wooldridge & Jennings, 1995). Traditional AI agents have been effective in
specialized domains, but often fall short in adaptability and generalization. Through alignment train-
ing, large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a), initially designed for
language tasks, have displayed unprecedented capabilities in instruction following (Ouyang et al.,
2022), reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b), planning, and even tool utilization (Schick et al., 2023). These
capabilities make