LongLLMLingua: Accelerating and Enhancing LLMs in Long Context
Scenarios via Prompt Compression
Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Xufang Luo,
Dongsheng Li, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, Lili Qiu
Microsoft Corporation
{hjiang,qianhuiwu,xufluo,dongsli,cyl,yuqyang,liliqiu}@microsoft.com
Abstract
In long context scenarios, large language mod-
els (LLMs) face three main challenges: higher
computational cost, performance reduction,
and position bias. Research indicates that LLM
performance hinges on the density and posi-
tion of key information in the input prompt. In-
spired by these findings, we propose LongLLM-
Lingua for prompt compression towards im-
proving LLMs’ perception of the key informa-
tion to simultaneously address the three chal-
lenges. Our extensive evaluation across vari-
ous long context scenarios demonstrates that
LongLLMLingua not only enhances perfor-
mance but also significantly reduces costs and
latency. For instance, in the NaturalQuestions
benchmark, LongLLMLingua boosts perfor-
mance by up to 21.4% with around 4x fewer
tokens in GPT-3.5-Turbo, leading to substantial
cost savings. It achieves a 94.0% cost reduction
in the LooGLE benchmark. Moreover, when
compressing prompts of about 10k tokens at ra-
tios of 2x-6x, LongLLMLingua can accelerate
end-to-end latency by 1.4x-2.6x.1
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have revolution-
ized user-oriented language technologies and are
serving as crucial components in more and more
applications. Carefully designing prompts is nec-
essary to achieve better performance in specific
downstream tasks. The commonly used technolo-
gies such as In-Context Learning (ICL) (Min et al.,
2022; Dong et al., 2023), Retrieval Augment Gener-
ation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Asai et al., 2024),
and Multi-turn Agent (Shen et al., 2024; Park et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2023a) are driving prompts to be
increasingly longer, even reaching thousands of to-
kens. Scenarios such as multi-document question
answering, code completion, and document sum-
marization also necessitate the processing of long
contexts.
1Access our code at https://aka.ms/LongLLMLingua.
There are three main challenges when LLMs are
used in long context scenarios: (1) Higher com-
putational costs, encompassing both financial and
latency expenses. (2) Longer prompts introduce
irrelevant and redundant information, which can
weaken LLMs’ performance (Shi et al., 2023), as
illustrated in Figure 1a. (3) LLMs exhibit position
bias (Kamradt, 2023), also known as the "lost in the
middle" issue (Liu et al., 2024), suggesting that the
placement of key information within the prompt
significantly affects LLMs’ performance. This is
demonstrated by the purple curve in Figure 1b.
Inspired by these observations, we propose
LongLLMLingua to address the three challenges.
Specifically, we use LLMLingua (Jiang et al.,
2023a) as the backbone for prompt compression
to address the first challenge, i.e., reduce cost and
latency. However, in the case of long contexts, the
distribution of question-relevant key information
in the prompt is generally dynamic and sparse. Ex-
isting prompt compression methods like LLMLin-
gua (Jiang et al., 2023a) and Selective-Context (Li
et al., 2023c) that often fail to consider question
during compression, resulting in retention of exces-
sive noise and decreased performance. LongLLM-
Lingua aims to improve LLMs’ perception of key
information pertinent to the question, thereby over-
coming the noise and position bias issues in long
contexts, shown in Figure 1b. The underlying prin-
ciple of LongLLMLingua is that small LM are
inherently capable of capturing the distribution of
key information relevant to a given question.
Our main contributions are five-fold: (1) We
propose a question-aware coarse-to-fine compres-
sion method to improve the key information den-
sity in the prompt (Sec. 4.1); (2) We introduce
a document reordering strategy to minimize po-
sition bias in LLMs. (Sec. 4.2); (3) We estab-
lish dynamic compression ratios for precise con-
trol between coarse and fine compression levels
(Sec. 4.3); (4) We propose a post-compression
arXiv:2310.06839v2  [cs.CL]  12 Aug 2024

1
5
10
15
20
Document Number in the Prompt
85
90
95
100
Normalized Performance(%)
Multi-Document QA
Code Completion
Summarization
(a) Performance v.s. Document Number
1st
5th
10th
15th
20th
Position of Document with the Answer
55
60
65
70
75
Accuracy(%)
Original
LongLLMLingua 
w/o Reorder (4x)
LongLLMLingua (4x)
(b) Performance 