Preprint. Work in progress.
SELF: SELF-EVOLUTION
WITH LANGUAGE FEED-
BACK
Jianqiao Lu1∗†, Wanjun Zhong2∗, Wenyong Huang2∗,
Yufei Wang2, Qi Zhu2, Fei Mi2, Baojun Wang2, Weichao Wang2, Xingshan Zeng2,
Lifeng Shang2, Xin Jiang2 & Qun Liu2
1The University of Hong Kong
2Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
jqlu@cs.hku.hk, {zhongwanjun1,wenyong.huang}@huawei.com
ABSTRACT
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive adaptability in various
fields, yet the optimal pathway of autonomous model evolution remains under-
explored. Drawing inspiration from the self-driven learning process of humans,
we introduce SELF (Self-Evolution with Language Feedback), a novel learning
framework that empowers LLMs to continually self-improve their abilities. SELF
initiates with a meta-skill learning process that equips the LLMs with capabili-
ties for self-feedback and self-refinement. SELF employs language-based feed-
back for detailed and nuanced evaluations, pinpointing response flaws and sug-
gesting refinements. Subsequently, the model engages in an iterative process of
self-evolution: they autonomously generate responses to unlabeled instructions,
refine these responses interactively, and use the refined and filtered data for itera-
tive self-training, thereby progressively boosting their capabilities. Moreover, the
SELF framework equips the model with the ability to self-refine during inference,
leading to further improved response quality. Our experiments on mathematical
and general tasks demonstrate that SELF enables the model to continually self-
improve without human intervention. The SELF framework indicates a promising
direction for the autonomous evolution of LLMs, transitioning them from passive
information receivers to active participants in their development.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs), like ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) , stand
at the forefront of the AI revolution, demonstrating versatility across tasks. Despite their evident
capabilities, the way towards achieving autonomous development of LLMs is still under-explored.
The development of automatically improved LLMs can draw inspiration from human self-driven
learning mechanisms. When facing new challenges, humans naturally engage in a learning cycle of
initial attempts, introspective feedback, and behavior refinement. This leads to a critical question:
“Can LLMs mimic the human learning process, utilizing self-refinement to enhance their inher-
ent capabilities?” Fascinatingly, a recent study (Ye et al., 2023) in top-tier LLMs such as GPT-4 has
revealed emergent meta-skills for self-refinement, signaling a promising future direction for the self-
evolution of LLMs. Despite this, current methods for LLM development typically rely on a single
round of instruction fine-tuning (Wei et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2023) with meticulously human-
crafted datasets and reinforcement learning-based methods (Ouyang et al., 2022) that depend on an
external reward model. These strategies not only require extensive resources and ongoing human
intervention but also treat LLMs as mere passive repositories of information rather than active learn-
ers. These limitations hinder LLMs from tapping into their inherent capabilities, obstructing their
progress toward a self-driven, autonomous learning paradigm.
Thus, we introduce SELF (Self-Evolution with Language Feedback) framework, designed to un-
lock the potential for autonomous self-evolution in LLMs.
Figure 1 depicts how SELF mim-
ics human-like self-driven learning, emphasizing progressive improvement of model capability
∗Leading co-authors with equal contribution.
†Work done during an internship at Huawei.
1
arXiv:2310.00533v4  [cs.CL]  1 Feb 2024

Preprint. Work in progress.
LLM with Meta-Skills
Initial LLM 
Self-Evolving LLM 
Meta-Skill 
Learning
Self-
Refinement
1st Self-
Evolve
Meta-Skill Learning
2nd Self-
Evolve
3rd  Self-
Evolve
Direct Generation
Self-Refinement
Figure 1: Evolutionary Journey of SELF: An initial LLM undergoes successive self-evolution itera-
tions (1st, 2nd, 3rd), enhancing its capabilities and acquiring a self-refinement meta-skill.
with self-evolution training. At the core of SELF are the two meta-skills (self-feedback and self-
refinement), empowering the model to progressively self-evolve by training on its own synthesized
data. Additionally, SELF leverages self-generated natural language feedback to offer in-depth anal-
ysis and guidance for refining responses, without the need for extern