Lost in the Logistical Funhouse: Speculative Design
as Synthetic Media Enterprise
Zoe Horn1, Liam Magee1, and Anna Munster2
1Institute for Culture and Society, Western Sydney University, Australia
z.horn@westernsydney.edu.au , l.magee@westernsydney.edu.au
2School of Art and Design, Faculty of Arts, Design and Architecture, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
a.munster@unsw.edu.au
December 2023
Abstract
From the deployment of chatbots as procurement negotiators by corporations such as Walmart
to autonomous agents providing ‘differentiated chat’ for managing overbooked flights, synthetic
media are making the world of logistics their ‘natural’ habitat.
Here the coordination of
commodities, parts and labour design the problems and produce the training sets from which
‘solutions’ can be synthesised. But to what extent might synthetic media, surfacing via proto-
platforms such as MidJourney and OpenAI and apps such as Eleven Labs and D:ID, be understood
as logistical media? This paper details synthetic media experiments with ‘ChatFOS’, a GPT-
based bot tasked with developing a logistics design business. Using its prompt-generated media
outputs, we assemble a simulation and parody of AI’s emerging functionalities within logistical
worlds. In the process, and with clunky ‘human-in-the-loop’ stitching, we illustrate how large
language models become media routers or switches, governing production of image prompts,
website code, promotional copy, and investor pitch scenarios. Together these elements become
links chained together in media ensembles such as the corporate website or the promotional
video, fuelling the fictive logistics visualisation company we have ‘founded’. The processes and
methods of producing speculative scenarios via ChatFOS lead us to consider how synthetic
media might be re-positioned as logistical media. Our experiments probe the ways in which
the media of logistics and the logistics of media are increasingly enfolded. We ask: what can a
(practice-based) articulation of this double-becoming of logistics and synthetic mediality tell us
about the politics and aesthetics of contemporary computation and capital?
Keywords— Synthetic media, logistic media, ChatGPT, AI, generative art
1
arXiv:2312.14424v1  [cs.CY]  22 Dec 2023

Introduction: Synthetic Media as Logistical Operations
From the vantage of late 2023, ‘synthetic media’ appears almost inadequate to describe the explosion
of mediatic technologies that depend upon the confluence of – and synthesise – data sets, parallel
computing hardware, neural network models and open-source software frameworks. What distin-
guishes synthetic media from media as such is not, we argue, its further removal from some plane of
the real – as though ‘synthetic’ here is to be opposed to some more genuine article – but instead a
recognition of its incremental logic of operation. Synthetic is properly opposed to the analytic, if by
the latter we understand a logic of directed decomposition of media into its constituent parts. In such
media, the whole is typically first imagined and planned by a human governor (the artist, programme
director, advertising agency, film production team etc), and only then are the parts composed and
assembled. Examples here include the composition of a dramatic script (the plot is typically planned,
drafted, and the script developed scene by scene); model photography (the photo concept is designed,
then the background, model, lighting and lens are selected and organised prior to the photograph
being shot); or music (an idea for a song is developed, and then the lyrics and score are composed,
rehearsed and recorded). Synthetic media by contrast works generatively, pixel by pixel, or token
by linguistic token. Its outputs are unplanned; the coherence of the whole is necessarily illusory,
appearing often only at the last iteration, or once the final word is added. Yet we argue the recent
extraordinary developments in synthetic media also exhibit a kind of logistical property: it is as
though the illusion becomes so overwhelming, some form of coordination or direction must have been
guiding the algorithm’s step-by-step incrementalism.
In this article, we look to chart this development by examining the emerging interrelations of
synthetic media and logistics. First, we explore early conceptualisations and experiments in synthetic
media, arguing that cybernetic concepts and frameworks provide a kind of epistemic bridge between
certain early a