WebVoyager
: Building an End-to-End Web Agent with
Large Multimodal Models
Hongliang He1,3∗, Wenlin Yao2, Kaixin Ma2, Wenhao Yu2, Yong Dai2,
Hongming Zhang2, Zhenzhong Lan3, Dong Yu2
1Zhejiang University, 2Tencent AI Lab, 3Westlake University
hehongliang@westlake.edu.cn, wenlinyao@global.tencent.com
Abstract
The rapid advancement of large language mod-
els (LLMs) has led to a new era marked by
the development of autonomous applications
in real-world scenarios, which drives innova-
tion in creating advanced web agents. Exist-
ing web agents typically only handle one input
modality and are evaluated only in simplified
web simulators or static web snapshots, greatly
limiting their applicability in real-world scenar-
ios. To bridge this gap, we introduce WebVoy-
ager, an innovative Large Multimodal Model
(LMM) powered web agent that can complete
user instructions end-to-end by interacting with
real-world websites. Moreover, we establish a
new benchmark by compiling real-world tasks
from 15 popular websites and introduce an au-
tomatic evaluation protocol leveraging multi-
modal understanding abilities of GPT-4V to
evaluate open-ended web agents. We show that
WebVoyager achieves a 59.1% task success rate
on our benchmark, significantly surpassing the
performance of both GPT-4 (All Tools) and the
WebVoyager (text-only) setups, underscoring
the exceptional capability of WebVoyager. The
proposed automatic evaluation metric achieves
85.3% agreement with human judgment, indi-
cating its effectiveness in providing reliable and
accurate assessments of web agents.1
1
Introduction
The recent advancement of large language models
(LLMs), such as ChatGPT and GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023), have sparked significant interest in devel-
oping LLM-based autonomous agents (AutoGPT,
2022) for complex task execution (Qin et al., 2023;
Schick et al., 2023). Recent studies have explored
the construction of text-based web browsing envi-
ronments and how to instruct large language model
agents to perform web navigation (Nakano et al.,
2021; Gur et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
∗Work done during the internship at Tencent AI Lab.
1Our code and data will be released at https://github.
com/MinorJerry/WebVoyager
2023). The primary challenge in these works lies
in managing complex and verbose HTML texts,
and solutions include simplifying and structuring
HTML (Nakano et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2023; Gur
et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023).
However, existing approaches overlook a critical
functionality of browsing: rendering HTML into
visual webpages. Particularly, vision capability is
crucial for utilizing tools such as web browsers,
as rendered web pages are inherently designed
with user experience (UX), emphasizing intuitive
information and structured presentation. This de-
sign principle of rendering makes visual analysis
more effective than mere HTML representation. At
present, large multimodal models (LMMs), partic-
ularly GPT-4V(ision) (OpenAI, 2023) and Gemini
(Team et al., 2023), demonstrate a remarkable abil-
ity to integrate intricate visual cues with textual
information. Existing studies such as Pix2Struct
(Lee et al., 2023) and WebArena (Zhou et al., 2023),
have initiated explorations into using screenshots
as inputs for decision-making in web navigation,
yet these are preliminary and do not represent a
deep exploration. Therefore, building multimodal
web agents to leverage the environment rendered
by browsers through screenshots, thus mimicking
human web browsing behavior, is now a viable
approach to enhance web navigation abilities.
We introduce WebVoyager (Figure 1), a multi-
modal web agent designed to autonomously ac-
complish web tasks online from start to finish,
managing the entire process end-to-end without
any intermediate human intervention. WebVoyager
processes the user query by making observations
from screenshots and textual content in interactive
web elements, formulates a thought on what ac-
tion to take (such as clicking, typing, or scrolling,
etc.), and then executes that action on the web-
sites. Inspired by Set-of-Mark Prompting (Yang
et al., 2023a), we mark interactive web elements
on screenshots (see Figure 2) to facilitate decision-
arXiv:2401.13919v4  [cs.CL]  6 Jun 2024

Available Websites
Screenshot (Image)
Web Elements (Text)
[1]: Delivering to Santa Clara 95050
[2]: <input> "Search Amazon"
                      ...
Observation
Thought: Based on observation...
        Click? Type? Scroll? ...
Send 
Query
Return 
Ans