A SURVEY OF RESOURCE-EFFICIENT
LLM AND MULTIMODAL FOUNDATION MODELS
Mengwei Xu♣, Wangsong Yin♦, Dongqi Cai♣, Rongjie Yi♣, Daliang Xu♦, Qipeng Wang♦, Bingyang Wu♦,
Yihao Zhao♦, Chen Yang♣, Shihe Wang♣, Qiyang Zhang♣, Zhenyan Lu♣, Li Zhang♣,
Shangguang Wang♣, Yuanchun Li♥, Yunxin Liu♥, Xin Jin♦, Xuanzhe Liu♦
♣Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT)
♦Peking University (PKU)
♥Tsinghua University (THU)
Contact: mwx@bupt.edu.cn
Website: https:github.com/UbiquitousLearning/Efficient_Foundation_Model_Survey
ABSTRACT
Large foundation models, including large language models (LLMs), vision transformers (ViTs),
diffusion, and LLM-based multimodal models, are revolutionizing the entire machine learning life-
cycle, from training to deployment. However, the substantial advancements in versatility and per-
formance these models offer come at a significant cost in terms of hardware resources. To support
the growth of these large models in a scalable and environmentally sustainable way, there has been
a considerable focus on developing resource-efficient strategies. This survey delves into the critical
importance of such research, examining both algorithmic and systemic aspects. It offers a compre-
hensive analysis and valuable insights gleaned from existing literature, encompassing a broad array
of topics from cutting-edge model architectures and training/serving algorithms to practical system
designs and implementations. The goal of this survey is to provide an overarching understanding of
how current approaches are tackling the resource challenges posed by large foundation models and
to potentially inspire future breakthroughs in this field.
Keywords Foundation Model · Large Language Model · Vision Transformer · Diffusion Model · Multimodal LLM ·
Model Compression · Machine Learning System · Serving System · Pre-training · Fine-tuning · Edge Intelligence
1
INTRODUCTION
In the rapidly evolving field of artificial intelligence (AI), a paradigm shift is underway. We are witnessing the tran-
sition from specialized, fragmented deep learning models to versatile, one-size-fits-all foundation models. These
advanced AI systems are capable of operating in an open-world context, interacting with open vocabularies and image
pixels for unseen AI tasks, i.e., zero-shot abilities. They are exemplified by (1) Large Language Models (LLMs) such
as GPTs [41] that can ingest almost every NLP task in the form as a prompt; (2) Vision Transformers Models (ViTs)
such as Masked Autoencoder [141] that can handle various downstream vision tasks; (3) Latent Diffusion Models
(LDMs) such as Stable Diffusion [336] that generate high-quality images with arbitrary text-based prompts; (4) Mul-
timodal models such as CLIP [321] and ImageBind [123] that map different modal data into the same latent space and
are widely used as backbone for cross-modality tasks like image retrieval/search and visual-question answering. Such
flexibility and generality marks a significant departure from the earlier era of AI, setting a new standard for how AI
interfaces with the world.
The success of these foundation models is deeply rooted in their scalability: unlike their predecessors, these mod-
els’ accuracy and generalization ability can continuously expand with more data or parameters, without altering the
underlying simple algorithms and architectures. An impressive evidence is the scaling law [177]: it describes how
the performance of transformer-based models can predictably improve with more model size and data volume; until
arXiv:2401.08092v2  [cs.LG]  23 Sep 2024

Resource-Efficient LLM and Multimodal Foundation Models
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Montenegro
Croatia
Ireland
New Zealand
Singapore
Switzerland
Austria
Belgium
Country-wise Electricity Consumption in 2022  (TWh)
Country
NVIDIA GPU Server Electricity Consumption Estimated in 2027
Google’s Electricity Consumption in 2022
AI-powered Google Search Electricity Consumption in 2023 
Figure 1: The electricity consumption comparison between countries and AI. Data source: [81].
today, the scaling law stands still. This scalability is not just a matter of model size; it extends to their ability to tackle
increasingly complex tasks, making them a cornerstone in the journey towards artificial general intelligence (AGI).
However, the scalability comes at a cost of huge resource demand. Foundation models, by their very nature, are
resource-hungry for training and deployment. These resources encompass not