PERSONAL LLM AGENTS:
INSIGHTS AND SURVEY ABOUT THE CAPABILITY, EFFICIENCY
AND SECURITY
Yuanchun Li1†, Hao Wen1‡, Weijun Wang1‡, Xiangyu Li1‡, Yizhen Yuan1‡, Guohong Liu1‡,
Jiacheng Liu1, Wenxing Xu1, Xiang Wang1, Yi Sun1, Rui Kong1, Yile Wang1, Hanfei Geng1,
Jian Luan2, Xuefeng Jin3, Zilong Ye4, Guanjing Xiong5, Fan Zhang6, Xiang Li7,
Mengwei Xu8, Zhijun Li9, Peng Li1, Yang Liu1, Ya-Qin Zhang1, Yunxin Liu1
1 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
2 Xiaomi AI Lab
3 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
4 Shenzhen Heytap Technology Co., Ltd.
5 vivo AI Lab
6 Viomi Technology Co., Ltd.
7 Li Auto Inc.
8 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
9 Soochow University
† Project Lead
‡ Section Lead
Contact: liyuanchun@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
Website: https://github.com/MobileLLM/Personal_LLM_Agents_Survey
ABSTRACT
Since the advent of personal computing devices, intelligent personal assistants (IPAs) have been
one of the key technologies that researchers and engineers have focused on, aiming to help users
efficiently obtain information and execute tasks, and provide users with more intelligent, convenient,
and rich interaction experiences. With the development of the smartphone and Internet of Things,
computing and sensing devices have become ubiquitous, greatly expanding the functional boundaries
of IPAs. However, due to the lack of capabilities such as user intent understanding, task planning, tool
using, and personal data management etc., existing IPAs still have limited practicality and scalability.
Recently, the emergence of foundation models, represented by large language models (LLMs), brings
new opportunities for the development of IPAs. With the powerful semantic understanding and
reasoning capabilities, LLM can enable intelligent agents to solve complex problems autonomously.
In this paper, we focus on Personal LLM Agents, which are LLM-based agents that are deeply
integrated with personal data and personal devices and used for personal assistance. We envision that
Personal LLM Agents will become a major software paradigm for end-users in the upcoming era. To
realize this vision, we take the first step to discuss several important questions about Personal LLM
Agents, including their architecture, capability, efficiency and security. We start by summarizing the
key components and design choices in the architecture of Personal LLM Agents, followed by an in-
depth analysis of the opinions collected from domain experts. Next, we discuss several key challenges
to achieve intelligent, efficient and secure Personal LLM Agents, followed by a comprehensive survey
of representative solutions to address these challenges.
Keywords Intelligent personal assistant · Large language model · LLM agent · Mobile devices · Intelligence levels ·
Task automation · Sensing · Memory · Efficiency · Security and privacy
arXiv:2401.05459v2  [cs.HC]  8 May 2024

Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
A Brief History of Intelligent Personal Assistants
5
2.1
Timeline View of the Intelligent Personal Assistants History
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Technical View of the Intelligent Personal Assistants History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Template-based Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Supervised Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Reinforcement Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.4
Early Adoption of Foundation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Personal LLM Agents: Definition & Insights
9
3.1
Key Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Intelligence Levels of Personal LLM Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Opinions on Common Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Fundamental Capabilities
14
4.1
Task Execution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
Task Automation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Autonomous Agent Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.3
Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Context Sensing . . . . . . . . .