A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory of Very Long Contexts
Kuang-Huei Lee 1 Xinyun Chen 1 Hiroki Furuta 1 John Canny 1 Ian Fischer 1
Abstract
Current Large Language Models (LLMs) are not
only limited to some maximum context length,
but also are not able to robustly consume long
inputs. To address these limitations, we propose
ReadAgent, an LLM agent system that increases
effective context length up to 20× in our exper-
iments. Inspired by how humans interactively
read long documents, we implement ReadAgent
as a simple prompting system that uses the ad-
vanced language capabilities of LLMs to (1) de-
cide what content to store together in a memory
episode, (2) compress those memory episodes
into short episodic memories called gist memo-
ries, and (3) take actions to look up passages in the
original text if ReadAgent needs to remind itself
of relevant details to complete a task. We evalu-
ate ReadAgent against baselines using retrieval
methods, using the original long contexts, and
using the gist memories. These evaluations are
performed on three long-document reading com-
prehension tasks: QuALITY, NarrativeQA, and
QMSum. ReadAgent outperforms the baselines
on all three tasks while extending the effective
context window by 3.5 −20×.
1. Introduction
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) are
highly capable of language understanding, but the amount
of text that LLMs are able to read at one time is constrained.
Not only is there an explicit context length limitation, but
it has also been found that performance of LLMs tends
to decline with increasingly long inputs even when they
don’t actually exceed the explicit context window (Liu et al.,
2023; Shi et al., 2023). In contrast, humans can read, under-
stand, and reason over very long texts, such as a series of
Project website and demo: read-agent.github.io.
Contribu-
tion statements: Appendix A. 1Google DeepMind. Correspon-
dence to: Kuang-Huei Lee <leekh@google.com>, Ian Fischer
<iansf@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
A very very long 
text ……
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
1. Episode
Pagination
page 1
page 2
page 3
page N
[page 1] gist
[page 2] gist
(Episodic) Gist Memory
[page N] gist
2. Gisting
Q: Why did John … ?
3. Lookup
Figure 1. ReadAgent workflow.
interrelated books.
We posit that an underlying reason for this gap is inherent
in the differences in reading approaches. Typically, we
use LLMs to consume the exact given content word-by-
word and the process is relatively passive. On the other
hand, humans read and reason over long text differently.
First, the exact information tends to be forgotten quickly,
whereas the fuzzier gist information, i.e. the substance
irrespective of exact words, from past readings lasts much
longer (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995b;a; Reyna, 2012)1. Second,
human reading is an interactive process. When we need to
remind ourselves of relevant details in order to complete a
task, such as answering a question, we look them up in the
original text.
We think that using the fuzzy gist memory to capture global
context and attending to local details together enables hu-
1Fuzzy-trace theory (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995b) posits that
people form two types of memory representations about a past
event – verbatim and gist memories. Gist memories, often episodic,
are fuzzy memories of past events, whereas verbatim memories
contain details of past events. People prefer to reason with gists
rather than with verbatim memories (Reyna, 2008).
1
arXiv:2402.09727v3  [cs.CL]  22 Jul 2024

A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory
mans to reason over very long context efficiently, in terms
of how much information to process at once, and is also
important for comprehension. For example, if we were to
infer the intention of a fictional character’s specific action
described on a page in a novel, besides focusing on the
surrounding pages, we likely also need to understand the
overall story and the character’s personality from reading
the whole book (see Appendix D for more analysis).
Motivated by these observations, we propose ReadAgent,
an LLM agent system that handles long content inspired by
the human approach. ReadAgent is simple to implement
and can be built entirely by prompting a previously-trained
LLM. As illustrated in Figure 1, it takes three primary steps:
(1) episode pagination, where we prom