Break the Sequential Dependency of LLM Inference Using
LOOKAHEAD DECODING
Yichao Fu 1 Peter Bailis 2 Ion Stoica 3 Hao Zhang 1
Abstract
Autoregressive decoding of large language mod-
els (LLMs) is memory bandwidth bounded, re-
sulting in high latency and significant wastes of
the parallel processing power of modern accel-
erators. Existing methods for accelerating LLM
decoding often require a draft model (e.g., spec-
ulative decoding), which is nontrivial to obtain
and unable to generalize. In this paper, we in-
troduce LOOKAHEAD DECODING, an exact, par-
allel decoding algorithm that accelerates LLM
decoding without needing auxiliary models or
data stores. It allows trading per-step log(FLOPs)
to reduce the number of total decoding steps, is
more parallelizable on single or multiple modern
accelerators, and is compatible with concurrent
memory-efficient attention (e.g., FlashAttention).
Our implementation of LOOKAHEAD DECODING
can speed up autoregressive decoding by up to
1.8x on MT-bench and 4x with strong scaling on
multiple GPUs in code completion tasks. Our
code is avialable at https://github.com
/hao-ai-lab/LookaheadDecoding
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are transforming the AI
industry. As they are increasingly integrated into diverse
applications such as search (Team et al., 2023) and chat-
bots (Ouyang et al., 2022), generating long sequences at
low-latency using LLMs is becoming one significant re-
quirement. However, current LLMs generate text based
on (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Jiang et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023) autoregressive decoding, which falls short in effi-
ciency, primarily for two reasons. First, autoregressive de-
coding generates only one token at a time. Hence, the overall
generation time is proportional to the number of decoding
steps. Second, each decoding step largely underutilizes the
parallel processing capabilities of modern accelerators (e.g.,
1UCSD 2Google 3UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Hao Zhang
<haozhang@ucsd.edu>.
GPUs). Given the pressing need for low latency in various
applications, improving autoregressive decoding remains a
central challenge.
Several approaches have been proposed – one such approach
is speculative decoding (Chen et al., 2023; Leviathan et al.,
2023) and its variants (He et al., 2023; Stern et al., 2018;
Cai et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Miao
et al., 2023). These methods all follow a guess-and-verify
approach: they use a draft model to speculate several subse-
quent tokens and then use the original (base) LLM to verify
these tokens in parallel. Since the draft model requires much
fewer resources and the cost of verifying multiple tokens in
parallel is similar to the cost of generating a single token,
these methods can achieve considerable speedups. However,
their speedups are bounded by the token acceptance rate
(§4.1), i.e., the fraction of tokens generated by the draft
model that passes the verification test of the base model.
This is because every token that fails verification needs to
be regenerated by the base model. In the worst case, if most
proposed tokens fail verification, these methods may slow
down the decoding process. Therefore, achieving a high ac-
ceptance rate is essential for these methods. Unfortunately,
training a draft model to achieve a high acceptance rate is
non-trivial, and the trained draft model does not generalize
across base models and datasets.
To address these problems, this paper develops LOOKA-
HEAD DECODING. We build upon a key observation: autore-
gressive decoding can be equivalently formulated as solv-
ing a non-linear system via the fixed point Jacobi iteration
method (§2), which we term as Jacobi decoding (Santilli
et al., 2023). Each Jacobi decoding step can generate multi-
ple tokens in parallel at different positions. Although these
tokens may appear at incorrect positions, we can leverage
this parallel generation approach to have the LLM generate
several disjoint n-grams in parallel in a single step. These
n-grams could potentially be integrated into future parts of
the generated sequence, pending verification by the base
model to maintain the output distribution.
LOOKAHEAD DECODING takes advantage of the partic-
ular characteristics of autoregressive decoding, which is
bounded by the memory bandwidth–as each generated to-
ken depends on all tokens before it–rather than compute, by
1
arXiv:2402.02057v1  [cs.LG]  3 Feb 2024

Lookahead decoding
using the available cycles to generate and verif