JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015
1
Model Compression and Efficient Inference for
Large Language Models: A Survey
Wenxiao Wang†, Wei Chen†, Yicong Luo†, Yongliu Long†, Zhengkai Lin†, Liye Zhang†, Binbin Lin, Deng
Cai, Xiaofei He Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Transformer based large language models have achieved tremendous success. However, the significant memory and
computational costs incurred during the inference process make it challenging to deploy large models on resource-constrained
devices. In this paper, we investigate compression and efficient inference methods for large language models from an algorithmic
perspective. Regarding taxonomy, similar to smaller models, compression and acceleration algorithms for large language models can
still be categorized into quantization, pruning, distillation, compact architecture design, dynamic networks. However, Large language
models have two prominent characteristics compared to smaller models: (1) Most of compression algorithms require finetuning or even
retraining the model after compression. The most notable aspect of large models is the very high cost associated with model finetuning
or training. Therefore, many algorithms for large models, such as quantization and pruning, start to explore tuning-free algorithms. (2)
Large models emphasize versatility and generalization rather than performance on a single task. Hence, many algorithms, such as
knowledge distillation, focus on how to preserving their versatility and generalization after compression. Since these two characteristics
were not very pronounced in early large models, we further distinguish large language models into medium models and “real” large
models. Additionally, we also provide an introduction to some mature frameworks for efficient inference of large models, which can
support basic compression or acceleration algorithms, greatly facilitating model deployment for users.
Index Terms—Large language models, model compression, efficient inference, quantization, pruning, knowledge distillation, compact
architecture design, dynamic networks.
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
L
ARGE language models (LLMs) has become an im-
portant and popular topic in the artificial intelligence
field. Compared with previous language models, LLMs (e.g.,
ChatGPT, LLaMA, Claude) show much greater generaliza-
tion capability for their unseen data. Furthermore, they even
present many abilities that smaller models do not present
(i.e., emergent abilities), such as multi-step reasoning and in-
struction following abilities. These progresses demonstrate
great potentials of LLMs.
However, the forbidding memory and computational
budgets in the inference process also prevent the deploy-
ment of LLMs. For example, a 10B models with float32
weights consumes 37GB memory, needless to say that the in-
ference memory cost will further increase in a speed square
to the sequence length. To deploy the models on resource
constrained devices, or even mobile devices, many LLMs
resort to model compression methods such as quantization
to reduce the inference memory and computational cost.
Model compression for deep learning models is a field
that appear much earlier than LLMs. It assumes that we
have already a pre-defined (or even pretrained) model.
Model compression devotes to reducing the memory and
•
† indicates equal contributions with specific .
•
Wenxiao Wang, Yicong Luo, Yongliu Long, and Binbin Lin are with the
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University.
•
Liye Zhang is with School of Mathematical Sciences, Zhejiang University.
•
Wei Chen, Zhengkai Lin, Deng Cai, and Xiaofei He are with State Key
Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University.
Manuscript released in February 10, 2024.
computational cost of the model in the inference process, so
that the model can run on various resource-constrained de-
vices. Algorithmically, common model compression meth-
ods include:
•
Quantization transforms float32 weights or activa-
tions into lower-bit float or integer numbers. Less bits
means less memory requirement. Further, less bits
may indicate higher parallelism and faster inference
speed.
•
Pruning devotes to removing unimportant compo-
nents (e.g., neurons, layers, etc) in a pre-designed
model, thus reducing the memory and computa-
tional cost in the inference cost.
•
Knowledge
distillation introduces a pretrained
large model as a teacher and transfers its knowledge
to a new smaller model which is called a student
model. Then, the smaller 