Towards Optimizing the Costs of LLM Usage
Shivanshu Shekhar
IIT Madras
India
Tanishq Dubey
IIT Delhi
India
Koyel Mukherjee, Apoorv Saxena, Atharv Tyagi
Adobe Research
Bangalore, India
Nishanth Kotla
IIT Guwahati
India
ABSTRACT
Generative AI and LLMs in particular are heavily used nowadays
for various document processing tasks such as question answering
and summarization. However, different LLMs come with different
capabilities for different tasks as well as with different costs, to-
kenization, and latency. In fact, enterprises are already incurring
huge costs of operating or using LLMs for their respective use cases.
In this work, we propose optimizing the usage costs of LLMs
by estimating their output quality (without actually invoking the
LLMs), and then solving an optimization routine for the LLM selec-
tion to either keep costs under a budget, or minimize the costs, in
a quality and latency aware manner. We propose a model to pre-
dict the output quality of LLMs on document processing tasks like
summarization, followed by an LP rounding algorithm to optimize
the selection of LLMs. We study optimization problems trading
off the quality and costs, both theoretically and empirically. We
further propose a sentence simplification model for reducing the
number of tokens in a controlled manner. Additionally, we propose
several deterministic heuristics for reducing tokens in a quality
aware manner, and study the related optimization problem of ap-
plying the heuristics optimizing the quality and cost trade-off. We
perform extensive empirical validation of our methods on not only
enterprise datasets but also on open-source datasets, annotated by
us, and show that we perform much better compared to closest
baselines. Our methods reduce costs by 40% −90% while improving
quality by 4% −7%. We release the annotated open source datasets1
to the community for further research and exploration.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Theory of computation →Models of computation; Theory
and algorithms for application domains; Design and analysis
of algorithms; • Applied computing →Document manage-
ment and text processing; • Computing methodologies →
Artificial intelligence; • Information systems →World Wide
Web.
1https://anonymous.4open.science/r/llm-cogs-57DD/
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06...$15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
KEYWORDS
LLM Selection, LLM Cost Optimization, LLM Quality Estimation,
Optimizing Token Length
ACM Reference Format:
Shivanshu Shekhar, Tanishq Dubey, Koyel Mukherjee, Apoorv Saxena,
Atharv Tyagi, and Nishanth Kotla. 2018. Towards Optimizing the Costs of
LLM Usage. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title
from your rights confirmation emai (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Generative AI based technologies are transforming the way we
approach most tasks nowadays and have the potential to signifi-
cantly disrupt the global economy. In fact, according to McKinsey
& Company, Generative AI could add 2.6 −4.4 trillion USD to the
global economy annually across different sectors, such as banking,
retail, logistics, technology and R&D, life sciences among others
[16, 32, 34]. OpenAI’s ChatGPT [5] and other GPT based large lan-
guage models available through OpenAI web APIs, along with other
open source LLMs such as LLAMA2 [36] etc. have proved tremen-
dously successful in document processing tasks, such as question
answering and summarization. In fact, according to recent reports,
Generative AI is “revolutionizing Intelligent Document Process-
ing (IDP) for businesses” [37] and is “poised to unleash the next
wave of productivity” [16]. However, this great potential comes at
a cost and it is important to understand the underlying economic
ramifications [10, 33].
In practical