ROUTERBENCH: A Benchmark for Multi-LLM Routing System
Qitian Jason Hu 1 Jacob Bieker 1 Xiuyu Li 2 Nan Jiang 3 Benjamin Keigwin 1 Gaurav Ranganath 1
Kurt Keutzer 2 Shriyash Kaustubh Upadhyay 1
Abstract
As the range of applications for Large Language
Models (LLMs) continues to grow, the demand
for effective serving solutions becomes increas-
ingly critical. Despite the versatility of LLMs,
no single model can optimally address all tasks
and applications, particularly when balancing per-
formance with cost. This limitation has led to
the development of LLM routing systems, which
combine the strengths of various models to over-
come the constraints of individual LLMs. Yet,
the absence of a standardized benchmark for
evaluating the performance of LLM routers hin-
ders progress in this area. To bridge this gap,
we present ROUTERBENCH, a novel evaluation
framework designed to systematically assess the
efficacy of LLM routing systems, along with a
comprehensive dataset comprising over 405k in-
ference outcomes from representative LLMs to
support the development of routing strategies. We
further propose a theoretical framework for LLM
routing, and deliver a comparative analysis of vari-
ous routing approaches through ROUTERBENCH,
highlighting their potentials and limitations within
our evaluation framework. This work not only
formalizes and advances the development of
LLM routing systems but also sets a standard
for their assessment, paving the way for more
accessible and economically viable LLM de-
ployments. The code and data are available at
https://github.com/withmartian/routerbench.
1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable
capabilities in addressing a wide range of tasks across aca-
demic and industrial scenarios (Bubeck et al., 2023). This
has motivated both researchers and practitioners to intro-
1Martian 2UC Berkeley 3UC San Diego. Correspondence to:
Qitian Jason Hu <jason@withmartian.com>.
Preprint.
duce new LLMs, designed for both generic and specialized
use cases, on a near-daily basis 1. However, the proliferation
of LLMs presents a challenge for LLM application builders
to identify the most suitable model for their applications.
While some proprietary models, such as GPT-4, are distin-
guished by their superior performance, they often incur high
economic costs due to the high API prices.
Many prior works focus on improving the capabilities of
individual LLMs while maintaining low costs. Techniques
such as prompting (Wei et al., 2022), quantization (Lin et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2023), and system optimization (Kwon
et al., 2023) may reduce a single model’s serving cost, yet
with new models emerging daily, these approaches may not
remain feasible or scalable in long term. Moreover, the
diversity of choices of LLMs available at various price and
performance tiers can be daunting for users attempting to
select and optimize an appropriate model2.
An alternative solution aims to select to optimal LLM for
each input through ”routing.” (Chen et al., 2023; Shnitzer
et al., 2023; ˇSakota et al., 2023). Routing offers several
advantages over single-LLM optimization. First, it is a
lightweight process, which treats each LLM as an input-
output black box, avoiding the need to delve into intricate
infrastructure details, thus making it flexible and broadly
applicable. Second, routing systems benefit from the diver-
sity of LLMs, while single-LLM methods may struggle to
keep pace with the expanding LLM landscape. Lastly, while
single-LLM strategies often face a compromise between per-
formance and other factors such as per-token costs, routing
systems adeptly balance a spectrum of user demands.
The rise in routing-related research has improved cost
efficiency, enhanced performance, and broadened acces-
sibility (Chen et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
2023). Despite these advances, a comprehensive bench-
mark for evaluating routing techniques remains absent. We
introduce ROUTERBENCH, the first comprehensive bench-
mark designed specifically for assessing router mecha-
nisms in terms of inference dollar cost and performance.
1As of January 16th, 2024, there are 469,848 models listed on
huggingface.com
2As of January 29th, 2024, there are 22,177 language models
with 7 billion parameters listed on huggingface.com
1
arXiv:2403.12031v2  [cs.LG]  28 Mar 2024

ROUTERBENCH: A Benchmark for Multi-LLM Routing System
<PROMPT>
"The following are multiple 
choice questions ..."
router
best performance
 