LongICLBench: Long-context LLMs Struggle with
Long In-context Learning
♠,♣Tianle Li, ♠,♣Ge Zhang, ♠Quy Duc Do, †Xiang Yue, ♠,♣Wenhu Chen
♠University of Waterloo
†Carnegie Mellon University
♣Vector Institute, Toronto
{t29li,wenhuchen}@uwaterloo.ca
https://github.com/TIGER-AI-Lab/LongICLBench
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made significant strides in handling long
sequences. Some models like Gemini could even to be capable of dealing with mil-
lions of tokens. However, their performance evaluation has largely been confined
to metrics like perplexity and synthetic tasks, which may not fully capture their
true abilities in more challenging, real-world scenarios. We introduce a benchmark
(LongICLBench) for long in-context learning in extreme-label classification using
six datasets with 28 to 174 classes and input lengths from 2K to 50K tokens. Our
benchmark requires LLMs to comprehend the entire input to recognize the massive
label spaces to make correct predictions. We evaluate on 15 long-context LLMs
and find that they perform well on less challenging classification tasks with smaller
label space and shorter demonstrations. However, they struggle with more chal-
lenging task like Discovery with 174 labels, suggesting a gap in their ability to
process long, context-rich sequences. Further analysis reveals a bias towards labels
presented later in the sequence and a need for improved reasoning over multiple
pieces of information. Our study reveals that long context understanding and rea-
soning is still a challenging task for the existing LLMs. We believe LongICLBench
could serve as a more realistic evaluation for the future long-context LLMs.
Easy
Hard
Figure 1: LLM performance on long in-context benchmark across different lengths. We curate
datasets with different difficulty levels. As we increase the difficulty of the dataset, LLMs struggle to
understand the task definition and suffer from significant performance degradation.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2404.02060v3  [cs.CL]  12 Jun 2024

1
Introduction
Large language models have already entered the long context era. A myriad of LLMs has been
released to support long context windows from 32K to 2M tokens. These methods (Hao et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2023a; Peng et al., 2023b; Ratner et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2024; Jin et al., 2024) can unlock
lots of complex real-world applications, such as long-document question-answering, multi-document
summarization, long-horizon agent tasks, and repo-level code understanding.
One line of research is based on AliBi (Press et al., 2022) and RoPE (Su et al., 2024) embeddings,
which allows us to train Transformers with short sequences and subsequently apply them to longer
sequences during inference. Recently, different approaches (Xiong et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024) help the model to extrapolate to 128K window size with continued pre-training.
Later on, LongRoPE (Ding et al., 2024) was proposed to further extend the context window to
2M tokens. Another line of research also utilizes methodologies like context window sliding and
segmentation to overcome the issue of the limited context window in original Transformers (Hao
et al., 2022; Ratner et al., 2023). Furthermore, architectural innovations, transitioning from traditional
Transformer-based designs to recurrent models or state space models, have shown promise in
facilitating long-range computations naturally (Orvieto et al., 2023; Gu & Dao, 2023; Peng et al.,
2023a). These techniques have been incorporated into several current open-source LLMs to enhance
long sequence understanding capability (Chen et al., 2023b; Tworkowski et al., 2023).
These long-context models are primarily evaluated on three types of evaluations:
1. language model perplexity over long documents, which is used by most papers.
2. passkey retrieval (Mohtashami & Jaggi, 2023; Chen et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023a) or needle-in-a-
haystack (Team et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2024), which requires reciting a randomly inserted information
in a long sequence. Several LLMs achieve 99%+ on this synthetic task.
3. long-document question-answer or summarization over Qasper (Dasigi et al., 2021).
Evaluations (1) and (2) only provide a minimum bar for LLMs to pass, but their results cannot reflect
LLMs’ true ability to deal with realistic long-sequence tasks. Evaluation (3) provides a more realistic
metric, however, these tasks are more focused on retrieving correct information from the long input