Hybrid LLM: Cost-Efficient and Quality-Aware Query Routing
Dujian Ding∗1, Ankur Mallick2, Chi Wang2, Robert Sim2, Subhabrata Mukherjee†3,
Victor Ruhle2, Laks V.S. Lakshmanan2, and Ahmed Awadallah2
1University of British Columbia
2Microsoft
3Hippocratic AI
dujian.ding@gmail.com
ankurmallick@microsoft.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) excel in most NLP tasks but also require expensive cloud
servers for deployment due to their size, while smaller models that can be deployed on lower cost
(e.g., edge) devices, tend to lag behind in terms of response quality. Therefore in this work we
propose a hybrid inference approach which combines their respective strengths to save cost and
maintain quality. Our approach uses a router that assigns queries to the small or large model
based on the predicted query difficulty and the desired quality level. The desired quality level
can be tuned dynamically at test time to seamlessly trade quality for cost as per the scenario
requirements. In experiments our approach allows us to make up to 40% fewer calls to the large
model, with no drop in response quality.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become the dominant force in natural language processing in
recent years [Zhao et al., 2023]. Their impact has been especially striking in generative applications
where it has extended beyond standard language understanding and question-answering benchmarks
like [Hendrycks et al., 2020, Srivastava et al., 2022] to several successful real-world deployments.
These include the wildly popular ChatGPT [OpenAI, b] and several other chatbots [Zheng et al.,
2023] powered by different LLMs [Taori et al., 2023, Touvron et al., 2023, OpenAI, 2023], which
allow users to engage in natural language conversations and obtain informative responses on a range
of practically useful tasks like creative writing, translation, code completion, etc. An important
added attraction of these models is their accessibility. Users can input queries and receive responses
in natural language, without any specialized data or code, and this is what has created such a
widespread demand for their services across regions, professions, and disciplines.
The best performing LLMs are based on the transformer architecture of [Vaswani et al., 2017]
and generally have tens of billions of parameters. E.g., Alpaca [Taori et al., 2023] has 13 billion
parameters, the best version of Llama-2 [Touvron et al., 2023] has 70 billion parameters, and
OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 [OpenAI, a], and GPT4 [OpenAI, 2023] are rumored to be much larger. Their
∗work performed during internship at Microsoft
†work performed while at Microsoft
1
arXiv:2404.14618v1  [cs.LG]  22 Apr 2024

(a) Accuracy v/s size of LLM
(b) Tail of accuracy difference
(c) Results with routing
Figure 1: We use a dataset of natural language queries from a range of tasks like question answering,
summarization, information extraction, etc. (See Section 4 for details). We observe that (a) smaller models
generally give poorer response quality or lower BART score [Yuan et al., 2021], (b) Llama-2 (13b) outperforms
GPT-3.5-turbo on around 20% examples, and (c) our router can make 22% fewer calls to GPT-3.5-turbo
(cost advantage) with 1% drop in response quality (BART score).
enormous size and the autoregressive nature of text generation in their transformer architectures
means that these models typically have a high compute and memory requirement that can only be
met by expensive cloud servers [Yu et al., 2022]. This can potentially impose an enormous cost on
developers and users as more LLM-based services are introduced. In response to this there has been
a surge of interest in designing smaller, cost-effective LLMs – e.g., [Touvron et al., 2023] provides
multiple versions of Llama-2, with the smallest having only 7 billion parameters, small enough to
run on a laptop1, while the smallest offering of Google’s Palm-2 model can even run on mobile
devices2. However empirical evaluations in [Chung et al., 2022, Touvron et al., 2023] as well as our
own evaluation in Figure 1a show that smaller models generally lag behind in terms of response
quality.
Faced with this tradeoff between response quality and inference cost, we propose a hybrid
inference approach which provides the best of both worlds. Our approach is motivated by the
observation that most tasks for which LLMs are useful, like creative writing, translation, code
completion, etc., include a range of queries of different difficulty l