1
A Survey on Efficient Inference for Large
Language Models
Zixuan Zhou*, Xuefei Ning*, Ke Hong*, Tianyu Fu, Jiaming Xu, Shiyao Li,
Yuming Lou, Luning Wang, Zhihang Yuan, Xiuhong Li, Shengen Yan, Guohao Dai,
Xiao-Ping Zhang Fellow, IEEE, Huazhong Yang Fellow, IEEE, Yuhan Dong, Yu Wang Fellow, IEEE
✦
Abstract—Large Language Models (LLMs) have attracted extensive
attention due to their remarkable performance across various tasks.
However, the substantial computational and memory requirements of
LLM inference pose challenges for deployment in resource-constrained
scenarios. Efforts within the field have been directed towards developing
techniques aimed at enhancing the efficiency of LLM inference. This
paper presents a comprehensive survey of the existing literature on
efficient LLM inference. We start by analyzing the primary causes of
the inefficient LLM inference, i.e., the large model size, the quadratic-
complexity attention operation, and the auto-regressive decoding ap-
proach. Then, we introduce a comprehensive taxonomy that organizes
the current literature into data-level, model-level, and system-level op-
timization. Moreover, the paper includes comparative experiments on
representative methods within critical sub-fields to provide quantitative
insights. Last but not least, we provide some knowledge summary and
discuss future research directions.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have garnered substantial
attention from both academia and industry in recent years.
The field of LLMs has experienced notable growth and sig-
nificant achievements. Numerous open-source LLMs have
emerged, including the GPT-series (GPT-1 [1], GPT-2 [2],
and GPT-3 [3]), OPT [4], LLaMA-series (LLaMA [5], LLaMA
2 [5], Baichuan 2 [6], Vicuna [7], LongChat [8]), BLOOM [9],
FALCON [10], GLM [11], and Mistral [12], which are used
for both academic research and commercial purposes. The
success of LLMs stems from their robust capability in han-
dling diverse tasks such as neural language understanding
•
Z. Zhou, K. Hong, T. Fu, S. Li, L. Wang are with Infinigence-AI and the
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China.
E-mail: zhouzx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (Z. Zhou)
•
X. Ning, Y. Lou, H. Yang, Y. Wang are with the Department of Electronic
Engineering, Tsinghua University, China.
E-mail: foxdoraame@gmail.com (X. Ning), yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn (Y.
Wang)
•
J. Xu, G. Dai are with Infinigence-AI and the Department of Electronic
Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, China.
E-mail: daiguohao@sjtu.edu.cn (G. Dai)
•
X.-P. Zhang, Y. Dong are with Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School.
E-mail: xpzhang@ieee.org (X.-P. Zhang), dongyuhan@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
(Y. Dong)
•
Z. Yuan, S. Yan are with Infinigence-AI.
•
X. Li is with Peking University.
•
Corresponding authors: Yu Wang, Xuefei Ning, Guohao Dai.
•
*Equal contribution.
(NLU), neural language generation (NLG), reasoning [13],
[14], and code generation [15], consequently enabling im-
pactful applications like ChatGPT, Copilot, and Bing. There
is a growing belief [16] that the rise and achievements of
LLMs signify a significant stride towards Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) for humanity.
Higher Computational 
Cost
Higher Memory Access 
Cost
Higher Memory Cost
Higher Latency
Lower Throughput
Higher Power
Consumption
Higher Storage
Fig. 1. The challenges of LLM deployment.
However, the deployment of LLMs is not always going
smoothly. As shown in Fig. 1, LLMs typically demand
higher computational cost, memory access cost and memory
usage in their inference process (we will analyse the root
causes in the Sec. 2.3), which deteriorates the efficiency
indicators (e.g., latency, throughput, power consumption
and storage) in the resource-constrained scenarios. This
poses challenges for the application of LLMs in both edge
and cloud scenarios. For example, the immense storage re-
quirements render the deployment of a 70-billion-parameter
model impractical on personal laptops for tasks such as
development assistance. Additionally, the low throughput
would result in significant costs if LLMs are used for every
search engine request, leading to a considerable reduction
in the profits of the search engine.
Fortunately, a substantial array of techniques has been
proposed to enable efficient inference for LLMs. To gain
a comprehensive understanding of existing studies and
inspire further research, this survey employs a hierarchical
classification and systematic summariza