A Survey on Self-Evolution of Large Language Models
Zhengwei Tao1,2, Ting-En Lin2, Xiancai Chen1, Hangyu Li2, Yuchuan Wu2, Yongbin Li2*,
Zhi Jin1*, Fei Huang2, Dacheng Tao3, Jingren Zhou2
1Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE, SCS, Peking University.
2Alibaba Group.
3Nanyang Technological University.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): shuide.lyb@alibaba-inc.com; zhijin@pku.edu.cn;
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced in various fields and intelligent agent applications. However, current
LLMs that learn from human or external model supervision are costly and may face performance ceilings as task complexity and
diversity increase. To address this issue, self-evolution approaches that enable LLM to autonomously acquire, refine, and learn
from experiences generated by the model itself are rapidly growing. This new training paradigm inspired by the human experi-
ential learning process offers the potential to scale LLMs towards superintelligence. In this work, we present a comprehensive
survey of self-evolution approaches in LLMs. We first propose a conceptual framework for self-evolution and outline the evolv-
ing process as iterative cycles composed of four phases: experience acquisition, experience refinement, updating, and evaluation.
Second, we categorize the evolution objectives of LLMs and LLM-based agents; then, we summarize the literature and provide
taxonomy and insights for each module. Lastly, we pinpoint existing challenges and propose future directions to improve self-
evolution frameworks, equipping researchers with critical insights to fast-track the development of self-evolving LLMs. Our
corresponding GitHub repository is available at https://github.com/AlibabaResearch/DAMO-ConvAI/tree/main/Awesome-Self-
Evolution-of-LLM. †
Keywords: Large Language Model, Self-Evolution, Self-Improvement, Self-Training, Autonomous Agents
1 Introduction
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence, large language models (LLMs) like GPT-3.5 [83], GPT-4 [1], Gemini [113],
LLaMA [115, 116], and Qwen [8] mark a significant shift in language understanding and generation. These models undergo
three stages of development as shown in Figure 1: pre-training on large and diverse corpora to gain a general understanding of
language and world knowledge [14, 30], followed by supervised fine-tuning to elicit the abilities of downstream tasks [25, 91].
Finally, the human preference alignment training enables the LLMs to respond as human behaviors [83]. Such successive
training paradigms achieve significant breakthroughs, enabling LLMs to perform a wide range of tasks with remarkable zero-
shot and in-context capabilities, such as question answering [109], mathematical reasoning [26], code generation [71], and
task-solving that require interaction with environments [73].
Despite these advancements, humans anticipate that the emerging generation of LLMs can be tasked with assignments
of greater complexity, such as scientific discovery [81] and future events forecasting [95]. However, current LLMs encounter
challenges in these sophisticated tasks due to the inherent difficulties in modeling, annotation, and the evaluation associated with
existing training paradigms [15]. Furthermore, the recently developed Llama-3 model has been trained on an extensive corpus
† Work done while Zhengwei Tao was interning at Alibaba Group.
1
arXiv:2404.14387v2  [cs.CL]  3 Jun 2024

1.Experience
Acquisition
2.Experience
Refinement
3.Updating
4.Evaluation
(1) Pre-training
(2) Supervised 
Fine-tuning
(4) Self-Evolution
(3) Human Alignment
2018 BERT
2019 T5
2023
2022 InstructGPT
Fig. 1 Training paradigms shift of LLMs.
comprising 15 trillion tokens1. It’s a monumental volume of data, suggesting that significantly scaling model performance by
adding more real-world data could pose a limitation.
This has attracted interest in self-evolving mechanisms for LLMs, akin to the natural evolution of human intelligence and
illustrated by AI developments in gaming, such as the transition from AlphaGo [101] to AlphaZero [102]. AlphaZero’s self-play
method, requiring no labeled data, showcases a path forward for LLMs to surpass current limitations and achieve superhuman
performance without intensive human supervision.
Drawing inspiration from the paradigm above, research on the self-evolution of LLMs has rapidly increased at different
stages of model development, such as self-instruct [127], self-play [117], self-improving [52], and self-training 