Stream of Search (SoS): Learning to Search in Language
Kanishk Gandhi∗
Stanford University
Denise Lee
Stanford University
Gabriel Grand
MIT
Muxin Liu
Harvey Mudd
Winson Cheng
Stanford University
Archit Sharma
Stanford University
Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University
Abstract
Language models are rarely shown fruitful mistakes while training. They
then struggle to look beyond the next token, suffering from a snowballing
of errors and struggling to predict the consequence of their actions several
steps ahead. In this paper, we show how language models can be taught
to search by representing the process of search in language, as a flattened
string — a stream of search (SoS). We propose a unified language for search
that captures an array of different symbolic search strategies. We demon-
strate our approach using the simple yet difficult game of Countdown,
where the goal is to combine input numbers with arithmetic operations to
reach a target number. We pretrain a transformer-based language model
from scratch on a dataset of streams of search generated by heuristic solvers.
We find that SoS pretraining increases search accuracy by 25% over models
trained to predict only the optimal search trajectory. We further finetune
this model with two policy improvement methods: Advantage-Induced
Policy Alignment (APA) and Self-Taught Reasoner (STaR). The finetuned
SoS models solve 36% of previously unsolved problems, including prob-
lems that cannot be solved by any of the heuristic solvers. Our results
indicate that language models can learn to solve problems via search, self-
improve to flexibly use different search strategies, and potentially discover
new ones. 1
“To err is human, to backtrack divine”
—Apocryphal
1
Introduction
Imagine, only ever seeing the right solutions to problems, never a mistake or recovery from
it. You might learn that problems must be solved in one clean pass, rather than through
exploration and error. Most data used to train language models (LMs) only reflects the
outcome of a decision making process, not the process itself. LMs never learn to make
mistakes. They never learn to search, plan or backtrack. Complex decision-making and
reasoning requires search. In this paper we explore the impact of training a LM on the
search process, including mistakes, and then allowing them to self-improve.
Transformer-based auto-regressive models have been shown to struggle with planning
(Valmeekam et al., 2024; Pallagani et al., 2023; Momennejad et al., 2024). Recent work has
highlighted this weakness in autoregressive models by identifying two main issues (LeCun,
2023; Bachmann & Nagarajan, 2024): 1) the snowballing of errors, where a single mistake can
compound and lead to increasingly poor performance in subsequent steps (Ross et al., 2011;
Arora et al., 2022), and 2) a difficulty in ‘lookahead tasks’, where the model must predict the
consequences of its actions several steps ahead (credit assignment, Cf. Sutton & Barto, 2018).
Both of these issues can be attributed to limited ability to search and backtrack. While recent
efforts have combined language models with symbolic search algorithms (Ahn et al., 2022;
∗Corresponding author: kanishk.gandhi@stanford.edu
1Code Available Here: https://github.com/kanishkg/stream-of-search
1
arXiv:2404.03683v1  [cs.LG]  1 Apr 2024

Current State: 50:[39, 66, 33, 13], Operations: []
Exploring Operation: 66-13=53, Resulting Numbers: [39, 33, 53]
Generated Node #0,0: 50:[39, 33, 53] Operation: 66-13=53
Moving to Node #0,0
Current State: 50:[39, 33, 53], Operations: ['66-13=53']
Exploring Operation: 39+33=72, Resulting Numbers: [53, 72]
Generated Node #0,0,0: 50:[53, 72] Operation: 39+33=72
Moving to Node #0,0,0
Current State: 50:[53, 72], Operations: ['66-13=53', '39+33=72']
Exploring Operation: 72-53=19, Resulting Numbers: [19]
19,50 unequal: No Solution
Moving to Node #0,0
Current State: 50:[39, 33, 53], Operations: ['66-13=53']
Exploring Operation: 53-33=20, Resulting Numbers: [39, 20]
...
Moving to Node #0,2
Current State: 50:[66, 33, 52], Operations: ['39+13=52']
Exploring Operation: 66/33=2, Resulting Numbers: [52, 2]
Generated Node #0,2,2: 50:[52, 2] Operation: 66/33=2
Moving to Node #0,2,2
Current State: 50:[52, 2], Operations: ['39+13=52', '66/33=2']
Exploring Operation: 52-2=50, Resulting Numbers: [50]
50,50 equal: Goal Reached
(a) Search problem
(b) Streams of Search
Target: 50
Numbers:
39, 66, 33, 13
(c) Pre-Training + Policy Improvement
Solution:
39 + 13 = 52
66 / 33 = 2