VIDUR: A LARGE-SCALE SIMULATION FRAMEWORK FOR LLM INFERENCE
Amey Agrawal 1 2 Nitin Kedia 3 Jayashree Mohan 3 Ashish Panwar 3 Nipun Kwatra 3
Bhargav S. Gulavani 3 Ramachandran Ramjee 3 Alexey Tumanov 1
ABSTRACT
Optimizing the deployment of Large language models (LLMs) is expensive today since it requires experimentally
running an application workload against an LLM implementation while exploring large configuration space formed
by system knobs such as parallelization strategies, batching techniques, and scheduling policies. To address
this challenge, we present Vidur – a large-scale, high-fidelity, easily-extensible simulation framework for LLM
inference performance. Vidur models the performance of LLM operators using a combination of experimental
profiling and predictive modeling, and evaluates the end-to-end inference performance for different workloads
by estimating several metrics of interest such as latency and throughput. We validate the fidelity of Vidur on
several LLMs and show that it estimates inference latency with less than 9% error across the range. Further, we
present Vidur-Search, a configuration search tool that helps optimize LLM deployment. Vidur-Search uses Vidur
to automatically identify the most cost-effective deployment configuration that meets application performance
constraints. For example, Vidur-Search finds the best deployment configuration for LLaMA2-70B in one hour on
a CPU machine, in contrast to a deployment-based exploration which would require 42K GPU hours – costing
218K dollars. Source code for Vidur is available at https://github.com/microsoft/vidur.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) can learn from and gen-
erate natural language texts on a massive scale. LLMs
such as GPT-3/4 (Brown et al., 2020; Bubeck et al., 2023),
LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a), and Phi (Li et al., 2023)
have demonstrated impressive performance on various nat-
ural language processing (NLP) tasks. However, LLM in-
ference – the process of using an LLM to produce natural
language outputs based on some input – is expensive. For
example, the cost of serving ChatGPT is estimated to be
$694K per day (Patel & Ahmed, 2023).
An LLM inference provider faces several challenges in opti-
mizing LLM deployment. First, the provider has to choose a
model parallelization strategy such as the number of tensor
parallel dimensions, number of pipeline stages, number of
replicas, etc. Second, the operator has to choose between
different scheduling algorithms (e.g., Orca (Yu et al., 2022),
vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023), Sarathi-Serve (Agrawal et al.,
2024)). Third, the provider has to determine several config-
uration parameters, such as maximum batch size (BS), wait
time for batching, as well as algorithm specific parameters
1Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. 2Part of work done
as an intern at Microsoft Research India.
3Microsoft Re-
search India.
Correspondence to: Amey Agrawal <ameya-
grawal@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 7 th MLSys Conference, Santa Clara, CA, USA,
2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).
(e.g., chunk size in Sarathi, watermark fraction in vLLM)
to satisfy the desired throughput and latency constraints. Fi-
nally, they have to generate representative workload traffic
to test out each of their models on an experimental testbed
with each of the different combinations above. Systemati-
cally optimizing deployment of tens of models with hundreds
of configuration options is expensive and impractical.
This cost is further exacerbated by our observation that op-
timal configuration is a function of a model-trace pair, i.e.,
optimal configuration also depends on application workload
characteristics (Figure 1a). In fact, an optimal config ob-
tained on one trace could be sub-optimal by a factor of up
to 2× (Figure 1b) when applied to the same model on a
different trace. With both new models and new traces being
released almost daily, the cost of identifying the optimal
deployment configuration becomes prohibitively expensive.
To tackle this challenge, we present Vidur – a large-scale,
high-fidelity and extensible LLM inference performance
simulator, and Vidur-Search – a configuration search tool.
Together, they enable fast and inexpensive exploration of
LLM inference performance under a variety of deployment
scenarios.
Simulating LLM inference poses several unique challenges
that are not addressed in prior work that simulate the perfor-
mance of deep neural network (DNN) training (Zhu et al.,
2020; Yu et al., 2021;