SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable
Automated Software Engineering
John Yang∗
Carlos E. Jimenez∗
Alexander Wettig
Kilian Lieret
Shunyu Yao
Karthik Narasimhan
Ofir Press
Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University
Abstract
Language model (LM) agents are increasingly being used to automate complicated
tasks in digital environments. Just as humans benefit from powerful software
applications, such as integrated development environments, for complex tasks like
software engineering, we posit that LM agents represent a new category of end
users with their own needs and abilities, and would benefit from specially-built
interfaces to the software they use. We investigate how interface design affects the
performance of language model agents. As a result of this exploration, we introduce
SWE-agent: a system that facilitates LM agents to autonomously use computers to
solve software engineering tasks. SWE-agent’s custom agent-computer interface
(ACI) significantly enhances an agent’s ability to create and edit code files, navigate
entire repositories, and execute tests and other programs. We evaluate SWE-agent
on SWE-bench and HumanEvalFix, achieving state-of-the-art performance on both
with a pass@1 rate of 12.5% and 87.7%, respectively, far exceeding the previous
state-of-the-art achieved with non-interactive LMs. Finally, we provide insight on
how the design of the ACI can impact agents’ behavior and performance.
1
Introduction
Recent work has demonstrated the efficacy of LM agents for code generation with execution feed-
back [39]. However, applying agents to more complex code tasks like software engineering remains
unexplored. To solve programming tasks, LM agents are typically designed to use existing applica-
tions, such as the Linux shell or Python interpreter [53, 57, 59]. However, to perform more complex
programming tasks such as software engineering [20], human engineers benefit from sophisticated ap-
plications like VSCode with powerful tools and extensions. Inspired by human-computer interaction
(HCI) studies on the efficacy of user interfaces for humans [7], we investigate whether LM agents
could similarly benefit from better-designed interfaces for performing software engineering tasks.
SWE-agent
Filesystem
sklearn/
examples/
README.rst
Terminal
Computer
LM Agent
Agent-Computer Interface
Navigate repo 
View files
LM-friendly commands
Search files
Edit lines
LM-friendly
environment feedback
Figure 1: SWE-agent is an LM interacting with a computer through an agent-computer interface
(ACI), which includes the commands the agent uses and the format of the feedback from the computer.
∗Equal contribution. Correspondence to johnby@stanford.edu, carlosej@princeton.edu.
Data, code, and leaderboard at swe-agent.com
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
arXiv:2405.15793v3  [cs.SE]  11 Nov 2024

Consider the simple setting of an agent interacting directly with a Linux shell [59]. In practice, we
find that LM agents can struggle to reliably take actions in this environment. For example, it fails to
provide simple commands to edit a small file segment, and does not provide any feedback if the user
makes an invalid edit. These deficits substantially hamper performance, motivating the need for an
agent-computer interface (ACI), i.e., an abstraction layer between the LM agent and computer, to
enhance the LM agent’s abilities in computer environments (Figure 1).
From this effort, we introduce SWE-agent, an agent composed of an LM and ACI, that can interact
with a computer to solve challenging real-world software engineering problems, such as those
proposed in SWE-bench [20]. In contrast to the Linux Shell’s granular, highly configurable action
space, SWE-agent’s ACI instead offers a small set of simple actions for viewing, searching through
and editing files. The ACI uses guardrails to prevent common mistakes, and an agent receives specific,
concise feedback about a command’s effects at every turn. We show that ACIs tailored specifically
for LMs outperform existing user interfaces (UIs) designed for human users, such as the Linux shell.
Using GPT-4 Turbo as a base LM, SWE-agent solves 12.47% of the 2,294 SWE-bench test tasks,
substantially outperforming the previous best resolve rate of 3.8% by a non-interactive, retrieval-
augmented system [20]. We perform an ablation study on a subset of 300 SWE-bench test instances
(SWE-bench Lite) to analyze our ACI design choices. The res