1
A Complete Survey on LLM-based AI Chatbots
Sumit Kumar Dam, Choong Seon Hong, Fellow, IEEE, Yu Qiao, Student Member, IEEE,
and Chaoning Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The past few decades have witnessed an upsurge
in data, forming the foundation for data-hungry, learning-based
AI technology. Conversational agents, often referred to as AI
chatbots, rely heavily on such data to train large language models
(LLMs) and generate new content (knowledge) in response to user
prompts. With the advent of OpenAI’s ChatGPT, LLM-based
chatbots have set new standards in the AI community. This paper
presents a complete survey of the evolution and deployment of
LLM-based chatbots in various sectors. We first summarize the
development of foundational chatbots, followed by the evolution
of LLMs, and then provide an overview of LLM-based chatbots
currently in use and those in the development phase. Recognizing
AI chatbots as tools for generating new knowledge, we explore
their diverse applications across various industries. We then
discuss the open challenges, considering how the data used to
train the LLMs and the misuse of the generated knowledge can
cause several issues. Finally, we explore the future outlook to
augment their efficiency and reliability in numerous applications.
By addressing key milestones and the present-day context of
LLM-based chatbots, our survey invites readers to delve deeper
into this realm, reflecting on how their next generation will
reshape conversational AI.
Index Terms—Large language models, chatbots, knowledge,
data, ChatGPT
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE exponential growth of data in recent years has
transformed the world of digital information. In 2023, the
total amount of data created, captured, copied, and consumed
globally reached around 120 zettabytes, and it will probably
go up to 147 zettabytes by 2024, with expectations to surpass
180 zettabytes by 2025 [1]. Fig. 1 illustrates the increase in
Fig. 1. Increase in data volume over the years [1].
Sumit Kumar Dam, Choong Seon Hong, Yu Qiao, and Chaoning Zhang
are with the School of Computing, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si
17104, Republic of Korea (email: skd160205@khu.ac.kr; cshong@khu.ac.kr;
qiaoyu@khu.ac.kr; chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com). (Sumit Kumar Dam and
Choong Seon Hong contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author:
Chaoning Zhang.)
Fig. 2. Google search interest over time [4].
data volume from 2010 to 2023, with projected values for
2024 and 2025. This rapid expansion of the data ecosystem
has paved the way for groundbreaking innovations in artificial
intelligence (AI), leading to the development of several ma-
chine learning models. Among these, large language models
(LLMs) have emerged as a prominent subset [2] thanks to their
exceptional ability to understand, generate, and manipulate
human language [3].
In the era of AI-powered chatbots [15]–[17], LLMs
have become instrumental in powering their conversational
capabilities and facilitating human-like interactions [2], [7].
The substantial rise in data and advancements in computa-
tional knowledge have improved the functionality of LLM-
based chatbots, making them increasingly popular and widely
adopted across various sectors. Their ability to understand and
respond in human language with never-before-seen context rel-
evance and accuracy, coupled with the capacity to handle vast
information streams, makes them essential tools in areas like
education [18]–[20], research [21]–[23], healthcare [8], [24],
[25], and many others [26]–[28]. Given the vast potential and
promising possibilities of LLM-based chatbots, their growing
usage and required optimization pose several challenges that
call for thorough research and evaluation. This need becomes
more apparent as the domain of LLM-based chatbots rapidly
expands, leading to an overwhelming amount of research
literature for scholars, professionals, and newcomers alike.
Therefore, our work provides a timely and complete survey
of LLM-based chatbots in response to these evolving needs.
Before the emergence of LLMs and LLM-based chatbots,
conversational AI faced several challenges. Early chatbots had
limited contextual understanding and domain specificity. They
often provided inaccurate responses. Lack of sophisticated
language comprehension limited their ability to interact in
a human-like manner, which led to robotic and disjointed
user experiences. Scalability across various industries was also
problematic, as handling vast information