Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
ROUTELLM: LEARNING TO ROUTE LLMS WITH
PREFERENCE DATA
Isaac Ong∗1
Amjad Almahairi∗2
Vincent Wu1
Wei-Lin Chiang1
Tianhao Wu1
Joseph E. Gonzalez1
M Waleed Kadous3
Ion Stoica1,2
1UC Berkeley
2Anyscale
3Canva
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) excel at a wide range of tasks, but choosing the
right model often involves balancing performance and cost. Powerful models offer
better results but are expensive, while smaller models are more cost-effective but
less capable. To address this trade-off, we introduce a training framework for
learning efficient router models that dynamically select between a stronger and
weaker LLM during inference. Our framework leverages human preference data
and employs data augmentation techniques to enhance performance. Evaluations
on public benchmarks show that our approach can reduce costs by over 2 times
without sacrificing response quality. Moreover, our routers exhibit strong general-
ization capabilities, maintaining performance even when routing between LLMs
not included in training. This highlights the potential of our framework to deliver
cost-effective, high-performance LLM solutions.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across
a wide range of natural language tasks. From open-ended conversation and question answering to
text summarization and code generation, LLMs have demonstrated an impressive level of fluency and
understanding (Achiam et al., 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023). This rapid progress has been enabled by a
combination of architectural innovations, such as the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017),
as well as scaling up data and training infrastructure (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019).
However, not all LLMs are created equal—there exists wide variation in the sizes of different LLMs,
which in turn affects the resources required to serve them. LLMs also differ in terms of the data on
which they are trained, which in turn leads to variations in the strengths, weaknesses, and capabilities
of different models. Broadly speaking, larger models tend to be more capable but come at a higher
cost, while smaller models tend to be less capable but cheaper to serve.
This heterogeneous landscape presents a dilemma in the practical deployment of LLMs. Although
routing all user queries to the largest and most capable model ensures high-quality results, it is
prohibitively expensive. Conversely, routing queries to smaller models can save costs—by more than
50x (e.g., Claude-3 Haiku vs. Opus1)—but may result in lower quality responses, as the smaller
model may not handle complex queries effectively.
LLM routing (Ding et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024) offers an effective solution by first processing each
user query through a router, which then determines the most suitable LLM to handle the query. The
router can direct simpler queries to smaller models and more complex ones to larger models, thereby
balancing response quality with cost efficiency.
Achieving optimal LLM routing—maximizing quality within a cost constraint or minimizing cost
for a target quality—is challenging. An ideal LLM router must (1) optimize response quality while
invoking a single LLM per query, minimizing cost and latency as compared to multi-LLM approaches;
(2) generalize to out-of-domain queries without needing separate routers for different domains; and
(3) work across a broad range of LLMs without retraining, ensuring flexibility as the LLM landscape
evolves.
∗Equal contribution. Correspondence to isaacong@berkeley.edu, anm@anyscale.com.
1Per one million output tokens: Haiku ($1.25) vs. Opus ($75)
1
arXiv:2406.18665v4  [cs.LG]  23 Feb 2025

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Figure 1: Routing performance/cost trade-off between GPT-4 and Mixtral-8x7B. (left) We demonstrate
several routers that outperform the random baseline on OOD eval GSM8K. (center) We demonstrate
improvement in router performance through data augmentation, denoted by (A), on MT Bench.
(right) We display the main metrics we consider: call-performance threshold (CPT, denoted in green)
and average performance gain recovered (APGR, denoted by the blue shaded region).
In this work, we introduce a principled framework for learning LLM routers from preference data.
Our approach involves routing between two classes of models: (1) strong models, which provide
high-quality responses at a high cost (e.g., GPT-4), and (2) w