Large Language Monkeys: Scaling Inference Compute
with Repeated Sampling
Bradley Brown∗†‡, Jordan Juravsky∗†, Ryan Ehrlich∗†, Ronald Clark‡, Quoc V. Le§,
Christopher R´e†, and Azalia Mirhoseini†§
†Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
‡University of Oxford
§Google DeepMind
bradley.brown@cs.ox.ac.uk, jbj@stanford.edu, ryanehrlich@cs.stanford.edu,
ronald.clark@cs.ox.ac.uk, qvl@google.com, chrismre@stanford.edu,
azalia@stanford.edu
Abstract
Scaling the amount of compute used to train language models has dramatically improved
their capabilities. However, when it comes to inference, we often limit models to making only one
attempt at a problem. Here, we explore inference compute as another axis for scaling, using the
simple technique of repeatedly sampling candidate solutions from a model. Across multiple tasks
and models, we observe that coverage – the fraction of problems that are solved by any generated
sample – scales with the number of samples over four orders of magnitude. Interestingly, the
relationship between coverage and the number of samples is often log-linear and can be modelled
with an exponentiated power law, suggesting the existence of inference-time scaling laws. In
domains like coding and formal proofs, where answers can be automatically verified, these
increases in coverage directly translate into improved performance. When we apply repeated
sampling to SWE-bench Lite, the fraction of issues solved with DeepSeek-Coder-V2-Instruct
increases from 15.9% with one sample to 56% with 250 samples, outperforming the single-sample
state-of-the-art of 43%. In domains without automatic verifiers, we find that common methods
for picking from a sample collection (majority voting and reward models) plateau beyond several
hundred samples and fail to fully scale with the sample budget.
1
Introduction
The ability of large language models (LLMs) to solve coding, mathematics, and other reasoning
tasks has improved dramatically over the past several years [47, 11, 2, 4]. Scaling the amount of
training compute through bigger models, longer pre-training runs, and larger datasets has been a
consistent driver of these gains [27, 37, 28].
In contrast, a comparatively limited investment has been made in scaling the amount of
computation used during inference. Larger models do require more inference compute than smaller
ones, and prompting techniques like chain-of-thought [61] can increase answer quality at the cost
of longer (and therefore more computationally expensive) outputs. However, when interacting
with LLMs, users and developers often restrict models to making only one attempt when solving a
problem.
Title inspired by https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infinite_monkey_theorem.
Code: https://github.com/ScalingIntelligence/large_language_monkeys.
Data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/ScalingIntelligence/monkey_business.
∗Equal Contribution. Work done by BB as a visiting researcher at Stanford.
1
arXiv:2407.21787v3  [cs.LG]  30 Dec 2024

x = int(input()) …
Problem: Input 
a number from 
stdin and …
Step 1: Generate many candidate solutions.
Step 2: Use a verifier to pick a final answer.
Problem 1 (coverage): Can we generate a correct 
solution?
Problem 2 (precision): Can we identify a correct 
solution from the generated samples?
Verifier
(e.g. unit tests, proof 
checkers, majority voting)
data = {} …
import requests …
LLM
x = int(input()) …
Figure 1: The repeated sampling procedure that we follow in this paper. 1) We generate many independent candidate
solutions for a given problem by sampling from an LLM with a positive temperature. 2) We use a domain-specific
verifier (ex. unit tests for code) to select a final answer from the generated samples.
In this work, we explore repeated sampling (Figure 1) as a simple approach to scaling inference
compute in order to improve reasoning performance. Existing work provides encouraging examples
that repeated sampling can be beneficial in math, coding, and puzzle-solving settings [60, 48,
23]. Notably, AlphaCode [41], a state-of-the-art system for competitive programming, finds that
performance continues to improve with a million samples per problem. Our goal is to systematically
characterize these benefits across a range of tasks, models, and sample budgets.
The effectiveness of repeated sampling is determined by two key properties:
1. Coverage: As the number of samples increases, what fraction of problems can we solve using
any sample that was generated?
2. Precision: Ho