AGENTLESS
:
Demystifying LLM-based Software Engineering Agents
Chunqiu Steven Xia∗Yinlin Deng∗Soren Dunn
Lingming Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{chunqiu2, yinlind2, sorend2, lingming}@illinois.edu
Abstract
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have significantly
advanced the automation of software development tasks, including code
synthesis, program repair, and test generation. More recently, researchers
and industry practitioners have developed various autonomous LLM
agents to perform end-to-end software development tasks. These agents are
equipped with the ability to use tools, run commands, observe feedback
from the environment, and plan for future actions. However, the complexity
of these agent-based approaches, together with the limited abilities of
current LLMs, raises the following question: Do we really have to employ
complex autonomous software agents? To attempt to answer this question,
we build AGENTLESS – an agentless approach to automatically resolve
software development issues. Compared to the verbose and complex setup
of agent-based approaches, AGENTLESS employs a simplistic three-phase
process of localization, repair, and patch validation, without letting the
LLM decide future actions or operate with complex tools. Our results
on the popular SWE-bench Lite benchmark show that surprisingly the
simplistic AGENTLESS is able to achieve both the highest performance
(32.00%, 96 correct fixes) and low cost ($0.70) compared with all existing
open-source software agents! In fact, AGENTLESS has already been adopted
by OpenAI as the go-to approach to showcase the real-world coding performance
of both GPT-4o and the new OpenAI o1 models. Furthermore, we manually
classified the problems in SWE-bench Lite and found problems with exact
ground truth patches or insufficient/misleading issue descriptions. As
such, we construct SWE-bench Lite-S by excluding such problematic issues
to perform more rigorous evaluation and comparison. Our work highlights
the currently overlooked potential of a simplistic, cost-effective technique
in autonomous software development. We hope AGENTLESS will help reset
the baseline, starting point, and horizon for autonomous software agents,
and inspire future work along this crucial direction. We have open-sourced
AGENTLESS at: https://github.com/OpenAutoCoder/Agentless
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become the go-to default choice for code gener-
ation [31, 28, 53, 89]. State-of-the-art LLMs like GPT-4 [71] and Claude 3.5 Sonnet [26]
have demonstrated their prowess in being able to synthesize code snippets based on
given user description. However, compared to the main evaluation setting of simple,
self-contained problems, applying LLMs on repository-level software engineering tasks
has been understudied. Software engineering tasks like feature addition, program repair,
and test generation require an in-depth understanding of not only information within files,
containing thousands of lines of code, but also repository-level dependencies across files.
∗Contributed equally with author ordering decided by Nigiri.
1
arXiv:2407.01489v2  [cs.SE]  29 Oct 2024

Recently, to address the gap and evaluate the ability of tools to automatically solve
real-world software engineering problems, the popular SWE-bench [44] benchmark has
been developed. In SWE-bench, each problem consists of a real-world GitHub issue
description and the corresponding Python repository. The task is to modify the repository
to resolve the issue, either fixing a bug or introducing a new feature. Recently, the authors
have published a subset of the benchmark – SWE-bench Lite [23] (300 problems) that
performs further filtering and focuses on bug fixing issues.
To solve the challenging real-world software development problems from SWE-bench,
inspired by the Devin AI Software Engineer [7], there has been a significant body
of work from both academia and industry focusing on developing agent-based ap-
proaches [108, 37, 101, 30, 64, 29]. While there is not a fixed definition for agent-based
approaches, they generally equip LLMs with a set of tools and allow agents to iteratively and
autonomously perform actions, observe feedback, and plan future steps [56]. Example tools
can include the ability to open/write/create files, search for code lines, run tests, and execute
shell commands. In each attempt to solve a problem, agent-based approaches will have
multiple turns, where each turn consis