CoPS: Empowering LLM Agents with Provable
Cross-Task Experience Sharing
Chen Yang∗† Chenyang Zhao∗‡
Quanquan Gu§¶
Dongruo Zhou§‖
Abstract
Sequential reasoning in agent systems has been significantly advanced by large language
models (LLMs), yet existing approaches face limitations. Reflection-driven reasoning relies solely
on knowledge in pretrained models, limiting performance in novel scenarios, while experience-
assisted reasoning often depends on external experiences and lacks clear principles for selecting
representative experiences.
We address these limitations by proposing CoPS (Cross-Task
Experience Sharing), a generalizable algorithm that enhances sequential reasoning by cross-task
experience sharing and selection. In detail, CoPS leverages agents’ experiences on previous
tasks, selecting distribution-matched experiences via a provable pessimism-based strategy to
maximize utility while minimizing risks from distribution shifts. Extensive experimental results
on benchmarks like Alfworld, Webshop, and HotPotQA demonstrate that CoPS consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, with superior sample efficiency suitable for resource-
constrained scenarios. Theoretically, we show that the performance of our algorithm depends on
both the quality of the pretrained LLM and the matching between the agent’s task-dependent
trial distribution and that generated by the LLM. Our work bridges the gap between existing
sequential reasoning paradigms and validates the effectiveness of leveraging cross-task experiences,
shedding light on the potential to improve agents’ generalization and adaptability across diverse
tasks. Our codes are available at https://github.com/uclaml/COPS.
1
Introduction
Burgeoning agent systems driven by advanced large language models (LLMs, (Devlin et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Hu et al., 2024a)) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
solving complex tasks through sequential reasoning (Qin et al., 2024; Hao et al., 2023; Huang et al.,
2024b; Chen et al., 2024c,b; Li et al., 2023a). These agent systems employ two typical sequential
reasoning paradigms: reflection-driven reasoning and experience-assisted reasoning. Reflection-
driven reasoning leverages a model’s internal capabilities through methods such as reflection (Shinn
et al., 2024), long-term rollouts (Zhou et al., 2023), or chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning (Wei et al.,
2022). While this approach capitalizes on the knowledge within the pre-trained model, it faces
∗Equal Contribution
†Department of Computer Science, Indiana University Bloomington, IN 47408, USA; e-mail: cya2@iu.edu
‡Department
of
Computer
Science,
University
of
California,
Los
Angeles,
CA
90095,
USA;
e-mail:
zhaochenyang@cs.ucla.edu
§Co-Corresponding Authors
¶Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; e-mail: qgu@cs.ucla.edu
‖Department of Computer Science, Indiana University Bloomington, IN 47408, USA; e-mail: dz13@iu.edu
1
arXiv:2410.16670v1  [cs.LG]  22 Oct 2024

go to shelf 6
Decision
Environment 
You arrive at loc 4. On the 
shelf 6, you see a vase 2.
Feedback
query
experience
put vase 2 in/
on safe 1
You won!
Decision
Feedback
You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a drawer 2, a shelf 5, a drawer 1, a shelf 4, a sidetable 1, a 
drawer 5, a shelf 6, a shelf 1, a shelf 9, a cabinet 2, a sofa 1, a cabinet 1, a shelf 3, a cabinet 3, a drawer 3, a shelf 11, a shelf 2, a 
shelf 10, a dresser 1, a shelf 12, a garbagecan 1, a armchair 1, a cabinet 4, a shelf 7, a shelf 8, a safe 1, and a drawer 4.  Your task 
is to: put some vase in safe. 
Others
Agent
Agent
Memory
Bank
CoPS
Figure 1: A brief illustration of CoPS, which fully leverages agents’ cross-task experiences to enhance
sequential reasoning by sharing and selecting distribution-matched experiences from previous task
trajectories.
notable limitations. Specifically, relying solely on existing knowledge in the pre-trained model to
generate rationales restricts the model’s performance when encountering novel scenarios. Moreover,
there is an increased risk of hallucinations, where internal reasoning may lead to plausible but
incorrect responses (Huang et al., 2023). These challenges highlight the need for integrating external
experiences to enhance the agent’s sequential reasoning capabilities.
In contrast, experience-assisted sequential reasoning utilizes retrieval-based methods that enable
the agent to interact with a memory 