Speculative Decoding with CTC-based Draft Model
for LLM Inference Acceleration
Zhuofan Wen1,4,Shangtong Gui1,2,4,Yang Feng1,3,4∗
1Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2State Key Lab of Processors,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3Key Laboratory of Al Safety, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{wenzhuofan24z,guishangtong21s,fengyang}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Inference acceleration of large language models (LLMs) has been put forward
in many application scenarios and speculative decoding has shown its advantage
in addressing inference acceleration. Speculative decoding usually introduces a
draft model to assist the base LLM where the draft model produces drafts and the
base LLM verifies the draft for acceptance or rejection. In this framework, the
final inference speed is decided by the decoding speed of the draft model and the
acceptance rate of the draft provided by the draft model. Currently the widely
used draft models usually generate draft tokens for the next several positions in a
non-autoregressive way without considering the correlations between draft tokens.
Therefore, it has a high decoding speed but an unsatisfactory acceptance rate. In
this paper, we focus on how to improve the performance of the draft model and
aim to accelerate inference via a high acceptance rate. To this end, we propose a
CTC-based draft model which strengthens the correlations between draft tokens
during the draft phase, thereby generating higher-quality draft candidate sequences.
Experiment results show that compared to strong baselines, the proposed method
can achieve a higher acceptance rate and hence a faster inference speed.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have been applied to a wide range of text generation tasks such as
machine translation and question answering due to their remarkable performance[1, 21, 6, 11]. In
many applications, LLMs is required to produce a long generation to give explanations to its answer
or perform chain of thought (CoT). Moreover, in some practical scenarios, LLMs have to resort to
other applications to fulfill a task under the frame of AI agents where LLMs usually generate long
outputs to communicate with other applications. All of these have a high demand for the inference
speed of LLMs. However, most LLMs employ a token-by-token autoregressive generation paradigm,
bringing on the severe inference delay problem, which obstacles the real applications of LLMs.
To mitigate the inference latency of LLMs, speculative decoding is proposed and proves to be a
more efficient decoding strategy compared with autoregressive generation[12, 4]. Besides the base
LLM, speculative decoding usually introduces a drafter model in the working flow that the draft
model generates candidates for the next several tokens and the base LLM verifies the candidate and
decides to accept or reject at some criterion. Once accept, then the winner candidate will be used as
the output, otherwise, the base LLM will decode and generate the output. In this process, the draft
∗Corresponding author: Yang Feng
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2412.00061v1  [cs.LG]  25 Nov 2024

model usually has few parameters and hence produces generations at a faster speed. Meanwhile, the
LLM can verify draft tokens parallelly and takes less time than generating the next several tokens by
itself. As only the candidate is accepted at a high rate, the decoding speed can be improved. It can
be derived that the final inference speed is related to the decoding speed of the draft model and the
acceptance rate of the candidate selected out by the draft model. Nevertheless, there is a trade-off for
the draft model between its decoding speed and its performance related to acceptance rate.
Following the principle of speculative decoding, many works focus on optimizing the draft model
to accelerate inference [15, 19, 5, 17] in which the methods based on non-autoregressive (NAR)
generation have shown promising results. The NAR speculative decoding methods draft the next
several tokens parallelly by predicting them independently based on the representation of the original
LLM. Although these methods drafts at a high speed, they ignore the dependence between the next
several tokens and sacrifice the performance as the cost. As a consequence, the speed of speculative
decoding can be affected via the accepta