HADES: Hardware Accelerated Decoding for 
Efficient Speculation in Large Language Models 
 
Ze Yang1st & * , Yihong Jin2nd, Xinhe Xu3rd 
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 
Champaign, USA 
{zeyang2, yihongj3, xinhexu2}@illinois.edu 
 
Abstract: Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized 
natural language processing by understanding and generating 
human-like text. However, the increasing demand for more 
sophisticated LLMs presents significant computational challenges 
due to their scale and complexity. This paper introduces Hardware 
Accelerated Decoding (HADES), a novel approach to enhance the 
performance and energy efficiency of LLMs. We address the 
design of an LLM accelerator with hardware-level speculative 
decoding support, a concept not previously explored in existing 
literature. Our work demonstrates how speculative decoding can 
significantly improve the efficiency of LLM operations, paving the 
way for more advanced and practical applications of these models. 
Keywords: 
Large 
Language 
Model 
(LLM); 
Hardware 
Accelerators; FPGAs; GPU; Transformer; Energy Efficiency; 
Speculative Decoding 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Large language models (LLMs) have gained a lot of 
attraction in recent years, revolutionizing the way we interact 
with technology and process information. Their impact spans a 
wide range of applications, from natural language processing, 
content creation, and translation services to more complex tasks 
like programming assistance, data analysis, and even aiding in 
research and discovery across various fields. 
As the demand for LLMs increases, the need for a higher 
token generation rate also increases drastically. Agents driven 
by LLM use techniques such as Chain-Of-Thought [23, 24] to 
accomplish complex tasks autonomously. In these cases, the 
token generation rate directly affects the execution time of the 
autonomous agents.  
Building on this momentum, our work delves into the 
exploration and implementation of Hardware-Accelerated 
Speculative Decoding. This innovative approach aims to 
significantly elevate the token generation rate, addressing the 
growing demand for efficiency in LLM applications. By 
leveraging hardware acceleration, we seek to enhance the speed 
and responsiveness of LLM-driven agents, making complex 
tasks more feasible in real-time scenarios. Our initiative marks a 
pivotal step towards optimizing the performance of large 
language models, ensuring they can meet the needs of advanced 
applications and deliver results with unprecedented speed.   
This paper makes the following contributions:  
1. We devise a modular design that enables speculative 
decoding in hardware with simply an add-on to the original 
ASIC implementation. 
2. We demonstrated that by implementing speculative 
decoding pipelines in hardware, significant speedup and power 
efficiency improvements can be achieved. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
  With the rise of popularity of AI in language generation, 
Generative Pre-trained Transformers have seen an exponential 
growth in their size, or weights. As the size for autoregressive 
models [17, 19, 20, 25] increases, so do their capabilities as 
demonstrated by models such as LLaMa [15, 18] and GPT-3 
[1]. However, with the increase in size, comes at a cost of 
inference time. Since a standard inference pass requires all 
weights in the model to be used at least once, leading to most 
large models being memory bottlenecked [15]. Moreover, each 
decoding step is dependent on the previous step and therefore 
must be done sequentially. This leads to inefficiency on GPUs, 
which are optimized for parallel workload, that often see 
utilization in the single-digits. 
  Increasing batch size allows the model to process multiple 
input streams in parallel and allows for efficient utilization and 
throughput, with slightly worse latency. However, batching is 
only useful in a serving environment where multiple users are 
calling the GPT at the same time. Most of the GPT usage is at a 
personal level, where the batch size is 1. There have been 
various attempts to reduce the runtime for a single decoding 
step by either reducing the amount of computation for all 
workload, such as quantization [5], or ones that are observed to 
be easily generated, such as early-exit [14]. While these 
methods have proven successful in reducing the time for 
decoding steps, they either require modification to the model 
architecture or do not maintain the same