Agent-R: Training Language Model Agents to Reflect via
Iterative Self-Training
Siyu Yuan1,2,∗,†, Zehui Chen2,∗,†, Zhiheng Xi1,†, Junjie Ye1,2,†, Zhengyin Du2, Jiecao
Chen2
1Fudan University, 2ByteDance Seed
∗Equal contributions, †Work done at ByteDance Seed
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) agents are increasingly pivotal for addressing complex tasks in
interactive and agentic environments. Existing work primarily focuses on enhancing performance
through behavior cloning from stronger experts, yet such approaches often falter in real-world
applications, mainly due to the inability to recover from errors. However, step-level critique
data is notoriously difficult and expensive to collect. Automating and dynamically constructing
self-critique datasets is thus crucial to empowering models with intelligent agent capabilities. In
this work, we propose an iterative self-training framework, Agent-R, that enables language Agent
to Reflect on the fly. Unlike traditional methods that reward or penalize actions solely based on
correctness, our approach leverages Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to construct training samples
that recover correct trajectories from erroneous ones. A key challenge of agent task reflection lies
in the necessity for timely revision rather than waiting until the end of a rollout to revise errors.
To address this, we introduce a model-guided critique construction mechanism: the actor model
identifies the first error step (within its current capability) in a failed trajectory. Starting from
it, we splice it with the adjacent correct path, which shares the same parent node in the tree.
This strategy enables the model to learn reflection based on its current policy, therefore yielding
better learning efficiency. To further explore the scalability of this self-improvement paradigm, we
investigate iterative refinement of both error correction capabilities and dataset construction. Our
findings demonstrate that this approach continuously improves the model’s ability to recover from
errors and enables earlier/timely error correction. Extensive experiments on three representative
interactive and agentic environments show that the proposed framework effectively equips agents
to identify and correct erroneous actions while avoiding loops, achieving superior performance
compared to baseline methods (+5.59%).
Date: March 25, 2025
Correspondence: Siyu Yuan at syyuan21@m.fudan.edu.cn
Project Page: https://github.com/bytedance/Agent-R
1
arXiv:2501.11425v3  [cs.AI]  24 Mar 2025

1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have become foundational tools in solving complex tasks across
interactive and agentic environments [5, 7, 45, 52, 60]. These LLM-based agents are increasingly
employed in scenarios requiring capabilities such as autonomous decision-making, error correction,
and task optimization [22, 31]. Despite the impressive performance of the existing methods, their
reliance on behavior cloning from stronger experts poses significant limitations: due to the adoption of
all-correct trajectories for training, it struggles to proactively self-correct errors, leading to cascading
failures and suboptimal task performance [50, 59]. This limitation arises from an inability to effectively
detect errors or revise trajectories dynamically once errors occur, highlighting the need for methods
emphasizing timely revision capabilities.
Previous work has proposed methods relying on explicit error signals or reward functions for self-
correction. However, these methods mainly focus on single-turn scenarios, such as code repair [4, 15],
tool use [26], and mathematical reasoning [12, 18]. In contrast, tasks in interactive and agentic
environments usually involve multi-turn interactions and do not reveal explicit error signals until
reaching the terminal state. Additionally, unlike mathematical reasoning [49], designing high-quality
reward functions to critique intermediate actions in long interactive trajectories remains difficult.
Wang et al. [43] improves agents’ self-reflection in embodied tasks, but it heavily relies on expert
models for correction during training data construction.
A critical bottleneck in enhancing error recovery in interactive and agentic environments is the lack of
step-level reflection data. Traditional approaches to collecting these datasets involve labor-intensive
annotation processes, which are both time-consuming and costly [20, 57, 63].
Without robust
reflection data, models face challenges in ide