2025-1-20
Evolving Deeper LLM Thinking
Kuang-Huei Leea,b,1, Ian Fischera,1, Yueh-Hua Wuc,2, Dave Marwood1, Shumeet Baluja1, Dale Schuurmans1,3
and Xinyun Chen1
aFirst author contribution, bSenior author contribution, cWork done as a student researcher at Google DeepMind, 1Google
DeepMind, 2UC San Diego, 3University of Alberta
We explore an evolutionary search strategy for scaling inference time compute in Large Language Models.
The proposed approach, Mind Evolution, uses a language model to generate, recombine and refine
candidate responses. The proposed approach avoids the need to formalize the underlying inference
problem whenever a solution evaluator is available. Controlling for inference cost, we find that Mind
Evolution significantly outperforms other inference strategies such as Best-of-N and Sequential Revision
in natural language planning tasks. In the TravelPlanner and Natural Plan benchmarks, Mind Evolution
solves more than 98% of the problem instances using Gemini 1.5 Pro without the use of a formal solver.
1. Introduction
How can a large language model (LLM) be guided to
think deeper about a complex problem and leverage
inference time compute to improve its problem solv-
ing ability? Prior research has investigated various
strategies for leveraging inference time compute, such
as chain-of-thought [41, 21], self-consistency [39], se-
quential revision based on feedback [36, 30, 8, 19, 1],
and search guided by auxiliary verifiers or evalua-
tors [43]. When a solution evaluator is available,
search strategies have an advantage of being able
to reliably improve problem solving ability with in-
creased compute. For example, methods such as Best-
of-N [4, 24, 25] and tree search [37] naturally exploit
additional compute to explore a larger set of solu-
tion candidates, thereby increasing the probability of
finding a successful solution.
To better exploit inference time compute, we pro-
pose an evolutionary search strategy for LLMs that
combines free-flowing stochastic exploration with
large-scale iterative refinement. We refer to this ap-
proach as Mind Evolution. As illustrated in Figure 1,
Mind Evolution is a genetic search strategy that evolves
a diverse population of candidate solutions, leveraging
an LLM to generate, recombine and refine solution
candidates based on feedback from an evaluator. The
overall process is analogous to combining divergent
thinking (free-flowing parallel idea exploration) with
convergent thinking (idea evaluation and selection),
considered as hallmarks of intelligent problem solving
behavior [14].
Unlike Best-of-N, which searches broadly by generat-
ing independent candidates for evaluation, Mind Evo-
lution searches both broadly and deeply, exploring a di-
verse set of candidates and refining the most promising
alternatives. Unlike sequential reasoning approaches,
such as self-refinement or tree search [37, 25], which
require evaluation of individual reasoning steps, Mind
Evolution performs global refinement of complete so-
lutions, and therefore only requires a global solution
evaluator rather than a stepwise process reward. Also,
typical of evolutionary methods, Mind Evolution can
be easily parallelized.
There has been prior work on combining evolution-
ary search with LLMs, primarily in the literature on
evolutionary program generation [34, 17, 29, 23, 6].
However, this prior work focuses on searching through
formal program spaces, using guidance from execu-
tion feedback or code explanation. By contrast, Mind
Evolution is not restricted to searching in a formal
space. This allows Mind Evolution to be applied to
problems that are not formalized, or remain difficult
to formalize, as long as a programmatic solution eval-
uator is available. In particular, we focus on natural
language planning tasks where candidate solutions
can still be automatically parsed, evaluated and cri-
tiqued using an implementable oracle evaluator. This
approach exploits the observation that it is often easier
to evaluate the quality of a candidate solution than it
is to generate good solutions for a given problem [11].
In the domain of natural language planning, we con-
sider the TravelPlanner [42] and Natural Plan [47]
benchmarks, where constraint satisfaction problems
are expressed in natural language without any explicit
formalization of the underlying objectives, constraints
or variables. These problems require a set of inter-
connected decisions that satisfy a set of global and
local constraints.