arXiv:2502.04180v2  [cs.LG]  9 Jun 2025
Multi-agent Architecture Search via Agentic Supernet
Guibin Zhang * 1 2 Luyang Niu * 2 Junfeng Fang 1 Kun Wang 3 Lei Bai 4 Xiang Wang 5
Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM)-empowered multi-
agent systems extend the cognitive boundaries
of individual agents through disciplined collabo-
ration and interaction, while constructing these
systems often requires labor-intensive manual de-
signs.
Despite the availability of methods to
automate the design of agentic workflows, they
typically seek to identify a static, complex, one-
size-fits-all system, which, however, fails to dy-
namically allocate inference resources based on
the difficulty and domain of each query. To ad-
dress this challenge, we shift away from the pur-
suit of a monolithic agentic system, instead op-
timizing the agentic supernet, a probabilistic
and continuous distribution of agentic architec-
tures. We introduce MaAS, an automated frame-
work that samples query-dependent agentic sys-
tems from the supernet, delivering high-quality
solutions and tailored resource allocation (e.g.,
LLM calls, tool calls, token cost). Comprehen-
sive evaluation across six benchmarks demon-
strates that MaAS (I) requires only 6 ∼45%
of the inference costs of existing handcrafted or
automated multi-agent systems, (II) surpasses
them by 0.54% ∼16.89%, and (III) enjoys
superior cross-dataset and cross-LLM-backbone
transferability. The code is available at https:
//github.com/bingreeky/MaAS.
1. Introduction
Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents (Richards &
et al., 2023; Nakajima, 2023; Reworkd, 2023) have made
remarkable strides in a spectrum of domains, such as ques-
tion answering (Zhu et al., 2024a), data analysis (Hong
*Equal contribution 1National University of Singapore 2Tongji
University 3Nanyang Technological University 4Shanghai AI Lab-
oratory 5University of Science and Technology of China. Cor-
respondence to: Kun Wang <wang.kun@ntu.edu.sg>, Lei Bai
<baisanshi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), code generation (Shinn et al.,
2023), web navigation (Deng et al., 2024), and data syn-
thesis (Butt et al., 2024), by equipping LLMs with high-
level features, including persona (Wang et al., 2023b; Chen
et al., 2024), tools (Shen et al., 2024; Richards & et al.,
2023), planning (Qiao et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; He et al.,
2023), and memory (Zhong et al., 2024; Hatalis et al., 2023;
Packer et al., 2023). Building upon the success of single
agents, researchers have demonstrated that combining mul-
tiple agents, either cooperatively (Zhuge et al., 2024) or
competitively (Zhao et al., 2023), can surpass the cognitive
and intellectual capabilities of individuals (Du et al., 2023;
Liang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a), showcasing the collective
intelligence in a society of LLM-agents (Piatti et al., 2024).
Early multi-agent systems, such as CAMEL (Li et al., 2023),
AutoGen (Wu et al., 2023), and MetaGPT (Hong et al.,
2023), while delivering specialized capacity, often heav-
ily rely on manual configurations, including prompt engi-
neering, agent profiling, and inter-agent communication
pipelines (Qian et al., 2024). This dependency significantly
limits the rapid adaptation of multi-agent systems to di-
verse domains and application scenarios (Tang et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2024c). More recently, the research com-
munity has shifted toward automating multi-agent system
design. For instance, DsPy (Khattab et al., 2023) and Evo-
Prompting (Guo et al., 2023) automate prompt optimization,
GPTSwarm (Zhuge et al., 2024) and G-Designer (Zhang
et al., 2024b) optimize inter-agent communication, and
EvoAgent (Yuan et al., 2024) and AutoAgents (Chen et al.,
2023a) self-evolve agent profiling. Nevertheless, they typ-
ically focus on automating specific aspects of the system.
Subsequently, ADAS (Hu et al., 2024a), AgentSqure (Shang
et al., 2024), and AFlow (Zhang et al., 2024c) broaden the
design search space. These state-of-the-art (SOTA) meth-
ods optimize a single, complex (multi-)agent workflow for a
given dataset via different search paradigms, e.g., heuristic
search (Hu et al., 2024a), Monte Carlo tree search (Zhang
et al., 2024c), and evolution (Shang et al., 2024), surpassing
the performance of manually designed systems.
Although the p