Multi-Agent Design: Optimizing Agents with
Better Prompts and Topologies
Han Zhou1 2 *, Xingchen Wan1, Ruoxi Sun1, Hamid Palangi1, Shariq Iqbal1, Ivan Vulić1 2, Anna Korhonen2 and
Sercan Ö. Arık1
1Google, 2University of Cambridge
Large language models, employed as multiple agents that interact and collaborate with each other,
have excelled at solving complex tasks. The agents are programmed with prompts that declare their
functionality, along with the topologies that orchestrate interactions across agents. Designing prompts
and topologies for multi-agent systems (MAS) is inherently complex. To automate the entire design
process, we first conduct an in-depth analysis of the design space aiming to understand the factors behind
building effective MAS. We reveal that prompts together with topologies play critical roles in enabling
more effective MAS design. Based on the insights, we propose Multi-Agent System Search (Mass), a
MAS optimization framework that efficiently exploits the complex MAS design space by interleaving its
optimization stages, from local to global, from prompts to topologies, over three stages: 1) block-level
(local) prompt optimization; 2) workflow topology optimization; 3) workflow-level (global) prompt
optimization, where each stage is conditioned on the iteratively optimized prompts/topologies from
former stages. We show that Mass-optimized multi-agent systems outperform a spectrum of existing
alternatives by a substantial margin. Based on the Mass-found systems, we finally propose design
principles behind building effective multi-agent systems.
1. Introduction
Prompt Optimization Space
Instruction
Exemplar
Topology Optimizer
debate
aggregate
reflect
Multi-Agent Design Space
custom
MASS
summarize
tool-use
Optimized topology
<ex_1>
<ex_2>
...
<ins>
<ex_1>
<ex_2>
...
<ins>
<ex_1>
<ex_2>
...
<ins>
Optimized prompt 
for each agent type
Optimized
MAS design
Figure 1 | Proposed Multi-Agent System Search
(Mass) framework discovers effective multi-
agent system designs (with both optimized topol-
ogy and optimized prompts, right) via interleaved
prompt optimization and topology optimization
in a customizable multi-agent design space (key
components illustrated on the left).
Large language models (LLMs) have showcased
extraordinary capabilities in understanding, rea-
soning, and generating coherent responses based
on user prompts, revolutionizing a wide range
of applications (Kojima et al., 2022; Ouyang
et al., 2022).
LLM-based agents enhance us-
ability by autonomously handling complex tasks
across diverse domains, including code generation
and debugging (Jimenez et al., 2023), retrieval-
augmented generation (Singh et al., 2025; Wang
et al., 2024a), data analysis (Guo et al., 2024; Hu
et al., 2024b), and interactive decision-making
(Li et al., 2025; Su et al., 2025). These agents are
typically programmed with prompts that reinforce
them to interact with the environment, utilizing
available tools, and approach their objectives over
multiple turns (Yao et al., 2023). Beyond individ-
ual agents, LLMs can be orchestrated within com-
plex topologies that coordinate multiple agents
toward a shared objective. This type of multi-agent system (MAS) typically outperforms its single-
agent counterpart by involving more diverse agentic perspectives or role profiles, such as agents as
verifiers (Shinn et al., 2024) and multi-agent debate (Qian et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b).
Corresponding author(s): {hzhouml, soarik}@google.com. Work done while Han Zhou was a Student Researcher at Google.
Published in the fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2026).
arXiv:2502.02533v2  [cs.LG]  31 Jan 2026

Multi-Agent Design: Optimizing Agents with Better Prompts and Topologies
However, designing effective MAS for new domains often proves to be challenging. First, the
single agent might suffer from prompt sensitivity (Verma et al., 2024), where simple modifications
in the prompt can already exert significant but unexpected degradation of performance (Liu et al.,
2024a; Zhou et al., 2024b). In MAS, when sensitive agents are cascaded, the compounding effect
due to prompt sensitivity may be amplified. Together with the prompt design, crafting an effective
topology might demand a substantial amount of manual experimentation, based on trial and error.
The problem complexity is exacerbated by the overall combinatorial search space, over not only the
unbounded space of prompt design but also the design de