Towards an AI co-scientist
Juraj Gottweis∗, ‡, 1, Wei-Hung Weng∗, ‡, 2, Alexander Daryin∗,1, Tao Tu∗,3,
Anil Palepu2, Petar Sirkovic1, Artiom Myaskovsky1, Felix Weissenberger1,
Keran Rong3, Ryutaro Tanno3, Khaled Saab3, Dan Popovici2, Jacob Blum7, Fan Zhang2,
Katherine Chou2, Avinatan Hassidim2, Burak Gokturk1,
Amin Vahdat1, Pushmeet Kohli3, Yossi Matias2,
Andrew Carroll2, Kavita Kulkarni2, Nenad Tomasev3, Yuan Guan7,
Vikram Dhillon4, Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav5, Byron Lee5,
Tiago R D Costa6, José R Penadés6, Gary Peltz7,
Yunhan Xu3, Annalisa Pawlosky1, ‡, Alan Karthikesalingam2, ‡ and Vivek Natarajan2, ‡
1Google Cloud AI Research, 2Google Research, 3Google DeepMind,
4Houston Methodist, 5Sequome,
6Fleming Initiative and Imperial College London,
7Stanford University School of Medicine
Scientific discovery relies on scientists generating novel hypotheses that undergo rigorous experimental
validation. To augment this process, we introduce an AI co-scientist, a multi-agent system built on Gemini
2.0. The AI co-scientist is intended to help uncover new, original knowledge and to formulate demonstrably
novel research hypotheses and proposals, building upon prior evidence and aligned to scientist-provided
research objectives and guidance. The system’s design incorporates a generate, debate, and evolve approach
to hypothesis generation, inspired by the scientific method and accelerated by scaling test-time compute.
Key contributions include: (1) a multi-agent architecture with an asynchronous task execution framework
for flexible compute scaling; (2) a tournament evolution process for self-improving hypotheses generation.
Automated evaluations show continued benefits of test-time compute, improving hypothesis quality. While
general purpose, we focus development and validation in three biomedical areas: drug repurposing, novel
target discovery, and explaining mechanisms of bacterial evolution and anti-microbial resistance. For drug
repurposing, the system proposes candidates with promising validation findings, including candidates for
acute myeloid leukemia that show tumor inhibition in vitro at clinically applicable concentrations. For
novel target discovery, the AI co-scientist proposed new epigenetic targets for liver fibrosis, validated by
anti-fibrotic activity and liver cell regeneration in human hepatic organoids. Finally, the AI co-scientist
recapitulated unpublished experimental results via a parallel in silico discovery of a novel gene transfer
mechanism in bacterial evolution. These results, detailed in separate, co-timed reports, demonstrate the
potential to augment biomedical and scientific discovery and usher an era of AI empowered scientists.
1 Introduction
Human ingenuity and creativity propel the advancement of fundamental research in science and medicine.
However, researchers, particularly in biomedicine, are faced with a breadth and depth conundrum. The
complexity of biomedical topics require increasingly deep and specific subject matter expertise, while leaps
in insight may still arise from broad knowledge bridging across disciplines. With the rapid rise in scientific
publications and the availability of numerous technologies for specialized high-throughput assays, mastery of
both discipline-specific depth and trans-disciplinary insight can be challenging.
Despite these challenges, many modern breakthroughs have emerged from trans-disciplinary endeavours.
Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna won the 2020 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work on
CRISPR [1], which combined techniques and strategies ranging from microbiology to genetics to molecular
biology. These benefits of synergy have also been seen beyond experimental biomedicine in numerous other
areas of science. Notably, Geoffrey Hinton and John Hopfield combined ideas from physics and neuroscience [2,
3] to develop artificial intelligence (AI) systems, which were awarded the 2024 Nobel Prize in Physics.
∗Equal contributions.
‡ Corresponding authors: {juro, ckbjimmy, apawlosky, alankarthi, natviv}@google.com
arXiv:2502.18864v1  [cs.AI]  26 Feb 2025

Scientist
The AI co-scientist multi-agent system
Scientist inputs
Ranking agent
tournaments
Research hypotheses 
comparison and ranking 
with scientific debate in 
tournaments. Limitations 
and top win-loss patterns 
are summarized and 
provided as feedback to 
other agents. This enables 
iterative improvement in 
quality of research 
hypothesis generation 
creating a 
self-improving  loop.
Generation 