MAS-GPT: Training LLMs to Build LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
Rui Ye 1 2 * Shuo Tang 1 * Rui Ge 1 Yaxin Du 1 Zhenfei Yin 3 4 Siheng Chen 1 # Jing Shao 2 #
Abstract
LLM-based multi-agent systems (MAS) have
shown significant potential in tackling diverse
tasks. However, to design effective MAS, existing
approaches heavily rely on manual configurations
or multiple calls of advanced LLMs, resulting in
inadaptability and high inference costs. In this pa-
per, we simplify the process of building an MAS
by reframing it as a generative language task,
where the input is a user query and the output is a
corresponding MAS. To address this novel task,
we unify the representation of MAS as executable
code and propose a consistency-oriented data con-
struction pipeline to create a high-quality dataset
comprising coherent and consistent query-MAS
pairs. Using this dataset, we train MAS-GPT, an
open-source medium-sized LLM that is capable
of generating query-adaptive MAS within a single
LLM inference. The generated MAS can be seam-
lessly applied to process user queries and deliver
high-quality responses. Extensive experiments
on 9 benchmarks and 5 LLMs show that the pro-
posed MAS-GPT consistently outperforms 10+
baseline MAS methods on diverse settings, indi-
cating MAS-GPT’s high effectiveness, efficiency
and strong generalization ability. Code will be
available at https://github.com/rui-ye/MAS-GPT.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT (Ouyang
et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023) have achieved significant suc-
cess on a wide range of tasks. However, a single LLM
often struggles to handle the diverse and complex range of
tasks (e.g., varying difficulties and domains) encountered in
practice (Hong et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024).
Such limitation has driven recent research towards build-
ing LLM-based multi-agent systems (MAS) (Qian et al.,
*Primary contributor 1Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2Shanghai
AI Laboratory 3University of Oxford 4The University of Sydney.
Correspondence to: Siheng Chen <sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn>, Jing
Shao <shaojing@pjlab.org.cn>.
Preprint.
Inadaptability!
Manually Design MAS
Query
Adaptability!
One Inference!
MAS-GPT: Generating MAS
High Effort!
32B
Query
Answer
MAS
Figure 1: Introduction of our proposed new paradigm for
building MAS. During inference, MAS-GPT adaptively gen-
erates a query-specific MAS with one LLM inference.
2024a; Chen et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), where multiple
LLMs (agents) with specialized capabilities work collabo-
ratively to achieve more effective solutions. For example,
MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2024) and ChatDev (Qian et al.,
2024a) build multi-LLM teams with expertise roles (e.g.,
programmer, tester, and product manager) to solve com-
plex coding tasks in a predefined pipeline; while Agent-
Verse (Chen et al., 2024) involves recruiters, executors, and
evaluators for iterative task solving. These methods have
shown superior performance over single LLM inference.
Despite achieving promising task performance, there are
two fundamental issues that hinder the broad applications
of MAS: inadaptability and high costs. (i) Inadaptability &
high human effort: MAS in MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2024),
ChatDev (Qian et al., 2024a), and AgentVerse (Chen et al.,
2024) are all manually crafted (e.g., for coding tasks). That
is, the collaboration structure and agents’ prompts are pre-
determined and static, lacking in the generality to adapt to-
wards any given tasks. (ii) High inference costs: Although
there have been efforts to design adaptive MAS, they es-
sentially shift the human cost onto the computational cost.
For example, both GPTSwarm (Zhuge et al., 2024) and
DyLAN (Liu et al., 2024) rely on LLMs to replace human
involvement, iteratively adjusting the collaboration structure
or agents’ prompts in the MAS for each specific task. How-
ever, this process often requires multiple LLM inferences.
Focusing on these key issues, this paper explores how to
adaptively build a query-specific MAS at a minimal cost.
Our core idea is to reframe the process of building an exe-
cutable MAS for each query as a generative language task,
making building MAS as simple and efficient as querying
ChatGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022). Given the generated MAS,
the query can then be seamlessly processed to produce the
final response, significantly simplifying the whole pipeline.
Under this context, we introduce MAS-GPT, an LLM
specifically trained to adaptively generate executable MAS
1
arXiv:2503.03686v1  [cs.C