A Survey on Evaluation of LLM-based Agents
Asaf Yehudai1,2, Lilach Eden2, Alan Li3, Guy Uziel2,
Yilun Zhao3, Roy Bar-Haim2, Arman Cohan3, Michal Shmueli-Scheuer2
1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 2IBM Research 3Yale University
{Asaf.Yehudai, Guy.Uziel1}@ibm.com {lilache, roybar, shmueli}@il.ibm.com
{haoxin.li, yilun.zhao, arman.cohan}@yale.edu
Abstract
LLM-based agents represent a paradigm shift
in AI, enabling autonomous systems to plan,
reason, and use tools while interacting with
dynamic environments. This paper provides
the first comprehensive survey of evaluation
methods for these increasingly capable agents.
We analyze the field of agent evaluation across
five perspectives: (1) Core LLM capabilities
needed for agentic workflows, like planning,
and tool use; (2) Application-specific bench-
marks such as web and SWE agents; (3) Evalu-
ation of generalist agents; (4) Analysis of agent
benchmarks’ core dimensions; and (5) Evalu-
ation frameworks and tools for agent develop-
ers. Our analysis reveals current trends, includ-
ing a shift toward more realistic, challenging
evaluations with continuously updated bench-
marks. We also identify critical gaps that future
research must address—particularly in assess-
ing cost-efficiency, safety, and robustness, and
in developing fine-grained, scalable evaluation
methods 1.
1
Introduction
LLMs have recently made remarkable progress,
tackling a wide range of challenging tasks. Yet,
LLMs are static, having fixed knowledge, and
confined to text-to-text interaction.
LLM-based
agents address those gaps by building on LLMs
as a backbone, integrating them into multi-step
workflows and equipping them with external
tools (Wang et al., 2024a). Hence, LLM agents can
perform computations, retrieve up-to-date informa-
tion, and interact with their environment. Crucially,
they can autonomously plan, execute, and adapt
complex strategies in real-world settings. This
agency enables them to tackle problems once be-
yond the reach of AI, unlocking innovative applica-
tions across diverse domains.
1Our GitHub repository tracks works in the field.
The shift from static models to adaptive, inter-
active agents calls for a new paradigm for evaluat-
ing LLM-based agents. Such evaluation must go
beyond measuring LLM textual outputs to assess
an agent’s capacity for sequential decision-making
and operation within dynamic environments. It
requires benchmarks that can assess the agent’s
ability to accomplish user tasks via a sequence of
actions and interactions. Moreover, benchmarks
must co-evolve with agent capabilities, accommo-
dating new classes of tasks and domains.
In this survey, we present the first overview of
LLM-based agent evaluation. We aim to benefit
developers, benchmark creators, practitioners, and
researchers by mapping the current evaluation land-
scape and identifying key gaps for future research.
We begin by discussing the evaluation of funda-
mental LLM-based agent capabilities (§2). These
include planning, tool use, self-reflection, and
memory. We then review benchmarks and evalua-
tion strategies for prominent types of agentic appli-
cations: web agents, software engineering agents,
scientific agents, and conversational agents (§3).
We continue to describe benchmarks and leader-
boards for evaluating generalist agents (§4). Con-
sequently, we define and analyze core dimensions
of agent benchmarks (§5). §6 reviews current eval-
uation frameworks for agent developers. These
frameworks integrate with the agent’s development
environment, and support its evaluation through-
out the entire development cycle. We conclude
with a discussion (§7) of current trends and future
research directions in agent evaluation. Figure 1
offers a visual summary of the survey’s structure.
2
Agent Capabilities Evaluation
LLM-based agents are composed of a backbone
LLM and an agent harness (Yao et al., 2022b).
Thus, evaluating the core suite of LLM abilities re-
quired for agentic tasks is paramount to understand-
arXiv:2503.16416v2  [cs.AI]  23 Apr 2026

Agent Evaluation
Agent Capabilities
Evaluation (§2)
Planning and Multi-
Step Reasoning (§2.1)
PlanBench (Valmeekam et al., 2023); FlowBench (Xiao
et al., 2024); Natural Plan (Zheng et al., 2024)
Function Calling
& Tool Use (§2.2)
BFCL (Yan et al., 2024); ToolBench (Qin et al.,
2023); ComplexFuncBench (Zhong et al., 2025);
Self-Reflection (§2.3)
LLM-Evolve (You et al., 2024); LLF-Bench (Cheng et al., 2023);
Memory (§2.4)
StreamBench (Wu et al., 2024a); M