Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Inducing Programmatic Skills for Agentic Tasks
Zora Zhiruo Wang
Apurva Gandhi
Graham Neubig
Daniel Fried
Carnegie Mellon University
{zhiruow,apurvag,gneubig,dfried}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
To succeed in common digital tasks such as web navigation, agents must
carry out a variety of specialized tasks such as searching for products or
planning a travel route. To tackle these tasks, agents can bootstrap them-
selves by learning task-specific skills online through interaction with the
web environment. In this work, we demonstrate that programs are an ef-
fective representation for skills. We propose agent skill induction (ASI),
which allows agents to adapt themselves by inducing, verifying, and uti-
lizing program-based skills on the fly. We start with an evaluation on the
WebArena agent benchmark and show that ASI outperforms the static
baseline agent and its text-skill counterpart by 23.5% and 11.3% in success
rate, mainly thanks to the programmatic verification guarantee during the
induction phase. ASI also improves efficiency by reducing 10.7–15.3% of
the steps over baselines, by composing primitive actions (e.g., click) into
higher-level skills (e.g., search product). We then highlight the efficacy
of ASI in remaining efficient and accurate under scaled-up web activities.
Finally, we examine the generalizability of induced skills when transferring
between websites, and find that ASI can effectively reuse common skills,
while also updating incompatible skills to versatile website changes.1
1
Introduction
To achieve success in common digital tasks such as web navigation, it is essential for agents
to be able to perform a variety of specialized tasks such as searching for products on a
shopping website (Yao et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2024) or finding a driving route on the map
(Zhou et al., 2024a; Xie et al., 2024a). While one source for agents to learn such tasks is
demonstrations annotated by humans (Deng et al., 2024) or synthesized with large language
models (LMs) on websites of interest (Murty et al., 2024b;a), this can be a challenging offline
learning procedure given the broad range of website domains and functionalities, especially
for the collected demonstrations to match or cover the distribution of tasks queried at
inference time (Zhou et al., 2024b); not to mention the limitations in resources to collect
abundant high-quality data at ease (Pan et al., 2024).
Instead of learning from demonstrations offline, an alternative way is to learn these tasks
directly online from test queries to prevent potential distribution mismatch between demon-
stration and downstream tasks (Levine et al., 2020). Some works propose to have agents
induce casual abstractions (Majumder et al., 2024), single-state guidelines (Fu et al., 2024), or
multi-step procedural workflows (Sarch et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b) as a form of interme-
diate knowledge to augment agent memory via non-parametric approaches (Brown et al.,
2020). Nonetheless, most existing approaches represent this knowledge in text, offering
limited quality and verification guarantees. In this work, we propose that executable programs
are effective representations for intermediate skill acquisition, given their verifiability and
composability advantages (Setlur et al., 2025).
We present ASI, namely agent skill induction (§2), that induces and applies programmatic
skills along the process of solving user web navigation queries. More concretely, given a
natural language (NL) query, the agent first generates an action trajectory attempting to
solve the task using built-in, primitive actions such as click and scroll. The agent then
1https://github.com/zorazrw/agent-skill-induction
1
arXiv:2504.06821v2  [cs.CL]  29 Aug 2025

Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
induces higher-level skills (e.g., search product(name)) that wrap primitive actions or prior
skills as executable programs, accompanied with corresponding test trajectories to verify
their quality. Verified skills are then incorporated into the agent action space and can be
directly called to solve future tasks with similar procedures, as depicted in Figure 1 (bottom).
Find my first cancelled order:
1. Go to all orders page
2. Sort orders by date ...
When will order #120 arrive ?
Query
Agent
Web Environment
fill(“Macbook”)
click(“Search”)
… … … … 
Memory
Skill 
Library
observe
act
Action trajectory
add
def search_product(box_id: str, query: str):
  """Search for a 