HierSearch: A Hierarchical Enterprise Deep Search Framework Integrating Local
and Web Searches
Jiejun Tan12*, Zhicheng Dou1†, Yan Yu2, Jiehan Cheng12, Qiang Ju2, Jian Xie2, Ji-Rong Wen1
1Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2Baichuan Intelligent Technology
{zstanjj, dou, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract
Recently, large reasoning models have demonstrated strong
mathematical and coding abilities, and deep search lever-
ages their reasoning capabilities in challenging information
retrieval tasks. Existing deep search works are generally lim-
ited to a single knowledge source, either local or the Web.
However, enterprises often require private deep search sys-
tems that can leverage search tools over both local and the
Web corpus. Simply training an agent equipped with multi-
ple search tools using flat reinforcement learning (RL) is a
straightforward idea, but it has problems such as low training
data efficiency and poor mastery of complex tools. To address
the above issue, we propose a hierarchical agentic deep search
framework, HierSearch, trained with hierarchical RL. At the
low level, a local deep search agent and a Web deep search
agent are trained to retrieve evidence from their correspond-
ing domains. At the high level, a planner agent coordinates
low-level agents and provides the final answer. Moreover, to
prevent direct answer copying and error propagation, we de-
sign a knowledge refiner that filters out hallucinations and ir-
relevant evidence returned by low-level agents. Experiments
show that HierSearch achieves better performance compared
to flat RL, and outperforms various deep search and multi-
source retrieval-augmented generation baselines in six bench-
marks across general, finance, and medical domains. 1
Introduction
Recently,
large
reasoning
models
(LRMs)
such
as
DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al. 2025) and OpenAI’s
O-series (Openai 2025b) models have shown impressive
capabilities in mathematics and coding. However, LRMs
are troubled by higher hallucination rates (Chowdhury
et al. 2025; Vectara 2025; Sun et al. 2025b) and restricted
by limited internal knowledge in knowledge-intensive
tasks. Thus, studies have combined LRMs with retrieval-
augmented generation (RAG) to enable models to obtain
external knowledge assistance, which is referred to as deep
search (Li et al. 2025a,b).
Existing deep search works often equip LRMs with a lo-
cal corpus search tool (Chen et al. 2025; DeepSeek-AI et al.
*This work was done when Jiejun Tan was doing an internship
at Baichuan.
†Corresponding author.
1Code and datasets are available at https://github.com/plageon/
HierSearch
2025; Song et al. 2025) or a Web search tool (Li et al.
2025a,b; Zheng et al. 2025). However, a common scenario
for most enterprises is that their private deep search sys-
tem interacts with both local knowledge sources and Web
knowledge sources (Yu et al. 2025). To be specific, enter-
prises often possess private domain-specific documents. Ex-
isting methods for building private RAG systems usually in-
volve processing them into a text chunk corpus and con-
structing knowledge graphs (Edge et al. 2024; Guo et al.
2024; Zhao et al. 2025). Web knowledge sources generally
include search engines and web pages. Generally speaking,
local knowledge sources are more professional and targeted.
Meanwhile, Web knowledge sources are more comprehen-
sive and timely (Zhao et al. 2024b; Wang et al. 2024a). This
deep search scenario with multiple knowledge sources poses
challenges to existing methods: Deep search agents need to
selectively use different knowledge sources based on user
questions and the characteristics of knowledge sources, and
cross-supplement missing knowledge.
A straightforward solution for the above challenge is
equipping the deep search agent with all search tools for all
knowledge sources and conducting flat reinforcement learn-
ing (RL). However, the flat RL solution is not suitable for
the following reasons: (1) Numerous search tools result in
a large action space during RL, leading to low training ef-
ficiency and instability. (2) Search tools within the same
knowledge source have stronger synergy (e.g., browsing a
Web page via a URL retrieved by a search engine or retriev-
ing text chunks mentioning an entity from the knowledge
graph), while that between tools across different knowledge
sources is weaker. However, flat RL fails to effectively uti-
lize this characteristic. (3) Moreover, preliminary experi-
m