CAM: A Constructivist View of Agentic Memory for
LLM-Based Reading Comprehension
Rui Li1,∗,†,‡
Zeyu Zhang1,†,‡
Xiaohe Bo1,†,‡
Zihang Tian1,†,‡
Xu Chen1,†,‡,§
Quanyu Dai2,§
Zhenhua Dong2
Ruiming Tang2
1Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{lirui121200, xu.chen}@ruc.edu.cn
daiquanyu@huawei.com
Abstract
Current Large Language Models (LLMs) are confronted with overwhelming infor-
mation volume when comprehending long-form documents. This challenge raises
the imperative of a cohesive memory module, which can elevate vanilla LLMs into
autonomous reading agents. Despite the emergence of some heuristic approaches,
a systematic design principle remains absent. To fill this void, we draw inspiration
from Jean Piaget’s Constructivist Theory, illuminating three traits of the agentic
memory—structured schemata, flexible assimilation, and dynamic accommodation.
This blueprint forges a clear path toward a more robust and efficient memory system
for LLM-based reading comprehension. To this end, we develop CAM, a prototype
implementation of Constructivist Agentic Memory that simultaneously embodies
the structurality, flexibility, and dynamicity. At its core, CAM is endowed with an
incremental overlapping clustering algorithm for structured memory development,
supporting both coherent hierarchical summarization and online batch integration.
During inference, CAM adaptively explores the memory structure to activate query-
relevant information for contextual response, akin to the human associative process.
Compared to existing approaches, our design demonstrates dual advantages in both
performance and efficiency across diverse long-text reading comprehension tasks,
including question answering, query-based summarization, and claim verification.
1
Introduction
Assimilation
Accommodation
New Schemata
Adapted Schemata
Figure 1: Memory development pro-
cess under constructivist perspective.
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–4]
have emerged as transformative tools in the realm of natural
language understanding. Nevertheless, their prowess tends to
falter when confronted with extremely long documents [5, 6].
Such a challenge arises not only due to the bounded context
capacity of LLMs, but more fundamentally because of the
difficulty in perceiving and aggregating critical information
fragments dispersed across distant parts of lengthy texts [7, 8].
A prevalent approach to addressing these limitations involves
equipping LLMs with explicit memory modules [9] for infor-
mation storage and retrieval, akin to human cognitive patterns.
Such modules maintain a cohesive "mental" representation of
ingested content, enabling LLMs to function as autonomous
reading agents that can store, retrieve, and reason over long-range dependencies. However, despite
the recent proliferation of agentic memory approaches [10–18], they generally mimic human memory
at a superficial level, lacking a coherent principle as the basis for their designs. This leads us to raise
a critical question: what are the traits of an effective memory module for LLM-based reading agents?
∗Work done during Rui Li’s internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. †Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on
Large Models and Intelligent Governance. ‡Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search
and Recommendation, MOE. §Corresponding authors.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
arXiv:2510.05520v1  [cs.CL]  7 Oct 2025

Table 1: Method comparison from the constructivist view. See Appendix B for more details.
Methods
Type
Structurality
Flexibility
Dynamicity
MemGPT [11]
Online
%
%
%
ReadAgent [13]
Online
%
%
%
RAPTOR [14]
Offline
"
"
%
GraphRAG [15]
Offline
"
%
%
MemTree [18]
Online
"
%
%
CAM (Ours)
Online (Batch)
"
"
"
To answer this basic question, we move beyond superficial designs and instead delve into the under-
pinnings of human cognition. In particular, we draw upon insights from Jean Piaget’s Constructivist
Theory [19–22], a cornerstone of cognitive science that has profoundly shaped the understanding of
how human memory develops. As stated in this theory, memory refers to an evolving mental system,
which actively organizes the received information into coherent cognitive structures (i.e., schemata).
When new information arrives, two fundamental operations (as shown in Figure 1) drive the schemata
development process: (1) assimilation, to fit new information into the current 